Network pharmacology-based analysis of the role of traditional
Chinese herbal medicines in the treatment of COVID-19

Shengwei Yu, Junwu Wang, Haitao Shen
Department of Emergency Medicine, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang 110004, China
Contributions: (I) Conception and design: S Yu; (II) Administrative support: H Shen; (III) Provision of study materials or patients: S Yu; (IV)
Collection and assembly of data: S Yu; (V) Data analysis and interpretation: S Yu; (VI) Manuscript writing: All authors; (VII) Final approval of
manuscript: All authors.
Correspondence to: Haitao Shen. Department of Emergency Medicine, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 36 Sanhao Street, Shenyang
110004, China. Email: shenht@sj-hospital.org.

The novel coronavirus named COVID-19, which originated in Wuhan, China, has spread
to many countries around the world. Currently, no effective medical treatment exists to combat this disease.
Traditional Chinese herbal medicines (CHM) have unique roles in the treatment of viral infections. In
this article we analyzed the effectiveness and possible molecular mechanisms of CHM formulas for the
prevention of COVID-19.
Methods: The active ingredients and action targets of CHM formulas were obtained from the TCMSP
database. Genes related to severe acute respiratory syndromes (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome
(MERS) were queried on the GeneCards database. The action mechanisms of these genes were predicted
using a Gene Ontology (GO)-based functional enrichment and annotation tool and the Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG).
Results: CHM formulas played a positive role in preventing COVID-19 and warrant further application.
Conclusions: Our research provides new evidence to support the possible value of CHM formulas for the
prevention of COVID-19. However, further clinical studies with large sample sizes are required to verify
their effectiveness.
Keywords: Novel coronavirus; COVID-19; traditional Chinese herbal medicines (traditional CHM); network
pharmacology
Submitted Feb 22, 2020. Accepted for publication Mar 29, 2020.
doi: 10.21037/apm.2020.03.27
View this article at: http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/apm.2020.03.27

As 2019 drew to a close, several cases of pneumonia of
unknown etiology were reported in Wuhan, the capital of
Hubei province in China (1). Up to now, the outbreak of
COVID-19, caused by a new coronavirus, Genes related
to severe acute respiratory syndromes (SARS) and Middle
East respiratory syndrome (MERS) were queried in the
GeneCards database (2). As of February 20, 2020, based on
data released by China CDC (http://2019ncov.chinacdc.cn/
nCoV/), the total number of confirmed cases was 74,680,
with 2,122 of these cases resulting in death. At present, no
drug exists to effectively treat or prevent COVID-19 (3).
In addition, immune response to the new coronavirus
differs according to the individual, leading to a variety of
clinical symptoms, disease course, and treatment response
to drugs and vaccines (4). Based on the National Health
Commission of China Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for
COVID-19 Infection (Sixth Edition) as well as the experience
of managing the virus in Hubei province (especially in
Wuhan), the Hubei Province Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol
for COVID-19 has been developed and released. In our
current study, we analyzed data relevant to exploring the
effectiveness and possible action mechanism of traditional
Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) formulas for the
prevention and treatment of the novel coronavirus.

