
Journal of Critical Care xxx (2020) xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Critical Care
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/journal-of-critical-care

A systematic review on the efﬁcacy and safety of chloroquine
for the treatment of COVID-19
Andrea Cortegiani a,⁎, Giulia Ingoglia a, Mariachiara Ippolito a, Antonino Giarratano a, Sharon Einav b
Department of Surgical, Oncological and Oral Science (Di.Chir.On.S.), Section of Anaesthesia, Analgesia, Intensive Care and Emergency, Policlinico Paolo Giaccone, University of Palermo, Italy
Intensive Care Unit of the Shaare Zedek Medical Medical Centre, Hebrew University Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel

Keywords:
SARS-CoV-2
COVID-19
Chloroquine
Pneumonia
Coronavirus
Purpose: COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) is a public health emergency of international concern. As of this
time, there is no known effective pharmaceutical treatment, although it is much needed for patient contracting
the severe form of the disease. The aim of this systematic review was to summarize the evidence regarding chloroquine for the treatment of COVID-19.
Methods: PubMed, EMBASE, and three trial Registries were searched for studies on the use of chloroquine in patients with COVID-19.
Results: We included six articles (one narrative letter, one in-vitro study, one editorial, expert consensus paper,
two national guideline documents) and 23 ongoing clinical trials in China. Chloroquine seems to be effective in
limiting the replication of SARS-CoV-2 (virus causing COVID-19) in vitro.
Conclusions: There is rationale, pre-clinical evidence of effectiveness and evidence of safety from long-time clinical use for other indications to justify clinical research on chloroquine in patients with COVID-19. However, clinical use should either adhere to the Monitored Emergency Use of Unregistered Interventions (MEURI)
framework or be ethically approved as a trial as stated by the World Health Organization. Safety data and data
from high-quality clinical trials are urgently needed.

COVID-19 (Coronavirus Disease-2019) is a public health emergency
of international concern. Patients contracting the severe form of the disease constitute approximately 15% of the cases [1]. As of this time there
is no known speciﬁc, effective, proven, pharmacological treatment. Invitro studies have suggested that chloroquine, an immunomodulant
drug traditionally used to treat malaria, is effective in reducing viral replication in other infections, including the SARS-associated coronavirus
(CoV) and MERS-CoV [2–4].
Chloroquine has been used worldwide for more than 70 years, and it
is part of the World Health Organization (WHO) model list of essential
medicines. It is also cheap and has an established clinical safety proﬁle
[3]. However, the efﬁcacy and safety of chloroquine for treatment of
SARS-CoV-2 (the new virus causing COVID-19) pneumonia remains
unclear.

