Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease 30 (2019) 9–18

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tmaid

A Systematic Review of therapeutic agents for the treatment of the Middle
East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV)

Hisham Momattina, Anfal Y. Al-Alib, Jaﬀar A. Al-Tawﬁqc,d,e,∗

Department of Pharmacy Services, King Khalid Hospital, Najran, Saudi Arabia
Department of Pharmacy Services, Dhahran Eye Specialist Hospital, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
Infectious Disease Unit, Specialty Internal Medicine Department, Johns Hopkins Aramco Healthcare, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

Keywords:
MERS
Therapy
Middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus

The Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) was ﬁrst described in 2012 and
attracted a great international attention due to multiple healthcare associated outbreaks. The disease carries a
high case fatality rate of 34.5%, and there is no internationally or nationally recommended therapy.
Method: We searched MEDLINE, Science Direct, Embase and Scopus databases for relevant papers published till
March 2019 describing in vitro, in vivo or human therapy of MERS.
Results: Initial search identiﬁed 62 articles: 52 articles were from Medline, 6 from Embase, and 4 from Science
Direct. Based on the inclusions and exclusions criteria, 30 articles were included in the ﬁnal review and comprised: 22 in vitro studies, 8 studies utilizing animal models, 13 studies in humans, and one study included both
in vitro and animal model. There are a few promising therapeutic agents on the horizon. The combination of
lopinavir/ritonavir and interferon-beta- 1b showed excellent results in common marmosets and currently is in a
randomized control trial. Ribavirin and interferon were the most widely used combination and experience comes
from a number of observational studies. Although, the data are heterogenous, this combination might be of
potential beneﬁt and deserve further investigation. There were no randomized clinical trials to recommend
speciﬁc therapy for the treatment of MERS-CoV infection. Only one such study is planned for randomization and
is pending completion. The study is based on a combination of lopinavir/ritonavir and interferon-beta- 1b. A
fully human polyclonal IgG antibody (SAB-301) was safe and well tolerated in healthy individuals and this agent
may deserve further testing for eﬃcacy.
Conclusion: Despite multiple studies in humans there is no consensus on the optimal therapy for MERS-CoV.
Randomized clinical trials are needed and potential therapies should be evaluated only in such clinical trials. In
order to further enhance the therapeutic aroma for MERS-CoV infection, repurposing old drugs against MERSCoV is an interesting strategy and deserves further consideration and use in clinical settings.
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) was
ﬁrst identiﬁed in 2012 and since then the disease has attracted an increasing international interest to resolve issues related to the epidemiology, clinical features, and therapy. This interest is further enhanced
by the fact that MERS-CoV infection resulted in 2428 cases in 27
countries around the world as of June 23, 2019 [1] and most of the
cases are linked to the Middle East [2]. So far there have been three
patterns of the transmission of MERS-CoV virus mainly: sporadic cases
[3], intra-familial transmissions [4–6] and healthcare-associated
transmission [3,7–26]. The disease carries a high case fatality rate of
34.5% [1] and so far there has been no proven eﬀective therapy and no
approved therapies for MERS-CoV infection by international or national
societies. Few therapeutic agents were reported in the literature but all
were based on retrospective analysis. In this study, we review available
literature on the current therapeutic options for the disease including in
vitro, animal studies, and studies in human.
