VACCINES AND ANTIVIRAL AGENTS

crossm
Adaptive Mutations in Replicase Transmembrane Subunits Can
Counteract Inhibition of Equine Arteritis Virus RNA Synthesis
by Cyclophilin Inhibitors
Montserrat Bárcena,b

Eric J. Snijder,a

Molecular Virology Laboratory, Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands
Section Electron Microscopy, Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands

Previously, the cyclophilin inhibitors cyclosporine (CsA) and alisporivir
(ALV) were shown to inhibit the replication of diverse RNA viruses, including arteriviruses and coronaviruses, which both belong to the order Nidovirales. In this study,
we aimed to identify arterivirus proteins involved in the mode of action of cyclophilin inhibitors and to investigate how these compounds inhibit arterivirus RNA synthesis in the infected cell. Repeated passaging of the arterivirus prototype equine arteritis virus (EAV) in the presence of CsA revealed that reduced drug sensitivity is
associated with the emergence of adaptive mutations in nonstructural protein 5
(nsp5), one of the transmembrane subunits of the arterivirus replicase polyprotein.
Introduction of singular nsp5 mutations (nsp5 Q21R, Y113H, or A134V) led to an ⬃2fold decrease in sensitivity to CsA treatment, whereas combinations of mutations further increased EAV’s CsA resistance. The detailed experimental characterization of engineered EAV mutants harboring CsA resistance mutations implicated nsp5 in
arterivirus RNA synthesis. Particularly, in an in vitro assay, EAV RNA synthesis was far
less sensitive to CsA treatment when nsp5 contained the adaptive mutations mentioned above. Interestingly, for increased sensitivity to the closely related drug ALV,
CsA-resistant nsp5 mutants required the incorporation of an additional adaptive mutation, which resided in nsp2 (H114R), another transmembrane subunit of the arterivirus replicase. Our study provides the ﬁrst evidence for the involvement of nsp2
and nsp5 in the mechanism underlying the inhibition of arterivirus replication by cyclophilin inhibitors.
IMPORTANCE Currently, no approved treatments are available to combat infections with nidoviruses, a group of positive-stranded RNA viruses, including important zoonotic and veterinary pathogens. Previously, the cyclophilin inhibitors cyclosporine
(CsA) and alisporivir (ALV) were shown to inhibit the replication of diverse nidoviruses
(both arteriviruses and coronaviruses), and they may thus represent a class of pannidovirus inhibitors. In this study, using the arterivirus prototype equine arteritis virus, we have established that resistance to CsA and ALV treatment is associated with
adaptive mutations in two transmembrane subunits of the viral replication machinery,
nonstructural proteins 2 and 5. This is the ﬁrst evidence for the involvement of speciﬁc replicase subunits of arteriviruses in the mechanism underlying the inhibition of
their replication by cyclophilin inhibitors. Understanding this mechanism of action is
of major importance to guide future drug design, both for nidoviruses and for other
RNA viruses inhibited by these compounds.
KEYWORDS alisporivir, arterivirus, cyclosporine, drug resistance, host factors,
nidovirus, nonstructural proteins, replication
September 2019 Volume 93 Issue 18 e00490-19