Journal of Medical Systems
(2020) 44:93
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-020-01562-1

EDUCATION & TRAINING

AI-Driven Tools for Coronavirus Outbreak: Need of Active Learning
and Cross-Population Train/Test Models on Multitudinal/Multimodal
Data
K. C. Santosh 1
Received: 11 March 2020 / Accepted: 17 March 2020
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020

The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak, which was identified in late 2019, requires special attention because of its future
epidemics and possible global threats. Beside clinical procedures and treatments, since Artificial Intelligence (AI) promises a new
paradigm for healthcare, several different AI tools that are built upon Machine Learning (ML) algorithms are employed for
analyzing data and decision-making processes. This means that AI-driven tools help identify COVID-19 outbreaks as well as
forecast their nature of spread across the globe. However, unlike other healthcare issues, for COVID-19, to detect COVID-19, AIdriven tools are expected to have active learning-based cross-population train/test models that employs multitudinal and multimodal data, which is the primary purpose of the paper.
Keywords COVID-19 . Artificial intelligence . Machine learning . Active learning . Cross-population train/test models .
Multitudinal and multimodal data

The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) is a global threat since it
was identified in late 2019 [1]. About COVID-19, the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention report [2] has clearly mentioned the following (U.S. Feb. 24, 2020):
Person-to-person spread of COVID-19 appears to occur
mainly by respiratory transmission. How easily the virus
is transmitted between persons is currently unclear.
Signs and symptoms of COVID-19 include fever,
cough, and shortness of breath [3]. Based on the incubation period of illness for Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome (MERS) and Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) coronaviruses, as well as observational data from reports of travel-related COVID-19,
CDC estimates that symptoms of COVID-19 occur
within 2–14 days after exposure.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO) report
[4], as of today (March 09, 2020), China confirmed 80,904
cases and 3123 of them were died. Outside China, 28,673
were confirmed and 686 of them were died from 104 countries, where Italy is found to be the most influenced country
after china: 7375 confirmed cases (366 deaths). Similarly,
there are 7382 confirmed cases (248 deaths) in Republic of
Korea, and U.S. is no exception (see Fig. 1). Based on the
confirmed cases, fatality rate, as of today, is still less than
other respiratory diseases: study of 72,000 COVID-19 patients finds 2.3% death rate [5]. Figure 2 provides confirmed
cases of COVID-19 across the world. Considering its global
coverage, the WHO has already been declared public health
emergency and its possible global threats, including consequences [6]. The devastating case in Wuhan China and future
epidemics require special attention [3, 7, 8].
At this point, it is important to note that coronavirus was
not a surprise case, since several years ago, in 2003, a novel
coronavirus was identified in patients with SARS, and it is
thought to be caused by an unknown infectious agent
[9–12]. Since then, apart from clinical procedures and treatments, Artificial Intelligence (AI) promises a new paradigm
for healthcare. Several different AI tools that are built upon
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms are employed to analyzing data and decision-making processes [13].
AI-driven tools can be used to identify novel coronavirus
outbreaks as well as forecast their nature of spread across the
globe. However, the fundamental theory behind AI-driven tools
is that they require sufficient training data (of all possible cases).
Often, traditional machine learning requires a clean set of annotated data so that classifiers can possibly be well trained, which
falls under scope of supervised learning. Over the past 5 decades
or more, tremendous progress has been made in resolving many
issues of several different projects. However, we failed to reach
the point: “to model an accurate classifier, how big the size of
training samples should be?” Do we still wait for collecting fairly
large amount of data? Deep Learning (DL), as an example, requires a large amount of data to be trained [14, 15]. The primary
idea behind the use of DL is not only to avoid feature engineering
but also to extract tiny features in radiology data (pixel-level
nodule, for example) [16].
Collecting large amount of data is not trivial, and one has to
wait for a long. Most of the reported AI-driven tools are limited to proof-of-concept models for coronavirus case. AI experts state the fact that limited data may skew results away
from the severity of coronavirus outbreak. The Wall Street
Journal [17] reported that coronavirus reveals limits of AI
health tools: some diagnostic-app makers are holding off
updating their tools, highlighting the shortage of data on the
new coronavirus and the limitations of health services billed
as AI when faced with novel, fast-spreading illnesses (Parmy
Olson, February 29, 2020). In a nutshell, social medias, newspapers, and health reports, we note that conventional AIdriven tools for real-world cases (with less data) may not provide optimal performance.
To detect COVID-19, AI-driven tools are expected to have
active learning-based cross-population train/test models that
employs multitudinal and multimodal data.

93

In the following, within the framework of COVID-19, the
concept of active learning will be discussed (Section 2).
Cross-population train/test models and its usefulness for
COVID-19 are discussed in Section 3. The necessity and the
use of multitudinal and multimodal data are explained in
Section 4. The paper concludes in Section 5.