pathogens
Article

Antiviral Effect of Lithium Chloride and
Diammonium Glycyrrhizinate on Porcine
Deltacoronavirus In Vitro
Xiaofeng Zhai, Shilei Wang, Mengyan Zhu, Wei He, Zhongzhou Pan and Shuo Su *
MOE International Joint Collaborative Research Laboratory for Animal Health & Food Safety, Jiangsu
Engineering Laboratory of Animal Immunology, Institute of Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China
* Correspondence: shuosu@njau.edu.cn

Porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV) is an emerging global swine virus that has a propensity
for interspecies transmission. It was identified in Hong Kong in 2012. Given that neither specific
antiviral drugs nor vaccines are available for newly emerging porcine deltacoronavirus, searching for
effective antiviral drugs is a high priority. In this study, lithium chloride (LiCl) and diammonium
glycyrrhizinate (DG), which are host-acting antivirals (HAAs), were tested against PDCoV. We found
that LiCl and DG inhibited PDCoV replication in LLC-PK1 cells in a dose-dependent manner.
The antiviral effects of LiCl and DG occurred at the early stage of PDCoV replication, and DG also
inhibited virus attachment to the cells. Moreover, both drugs inhibited PDCoV-induced apoptosis in
LLC-PK1 cells. This study suggests LiCl and DG as new drugs for the treatment of PDCoV infection.
Keywords: PDCoV; lithium chloride; diammonium glycyrrhizinate; apoptosis
PDCoV, first discovered in Hong Kong in 2012, broke out in the United States in early 2014 and
then spread to China, Thailand, and Canada. As a novel coronavirus, PDCoV can cause severe diarrhea
and vomiting, with high mortality in piglets, which can lead to serious economic loss in the swine
industry [1–3]. Coronaviruses (CoVs) are enveloped positive-stranded RNA viruses that are classified
into four genera including Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Deltacoronavirus. CoVs are prone to interspecies
transmission [4]. In particular, Betacoronaviruses include SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, which can cause
lethal respiratory infections in humans and are notable examples of interspecies transmission [5,6].
Cross-species transmission, facilitated by the widespread prevalence of CoV in mammals and birds,
and genetic diversity, driven by high mutation rates and high frequency of recombination, increase the
chance of successful adaptation to a new host [7].
PDCoV, belonging to the genus Deltacoronavirus and the family Coronaviridae within the order
Nidovirales, is a recently discovered CoV of unknown origin, which has a wide host range, including
wild birds, swine, and other mammals [8,9]. The PDCoV genome is approximately 25 kb and has seven
open reading frames, i.e., open reading frame 1a/1b (ORF1a/1b), spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M),
nucleocapsid (N), NS6, and NS7. As an emerging swine enteropathogenic coronavirus, PDCoV has
strong pathogenicity and can cause watery diarrhea, vomiting, and high mortality in piglets, posing
a potential threat to the swine husbandry. The post-infection mortality of suckling piglets can reach
30% to 40%, causing serious economic losses to the pork industry [10]. PDCoV efficiently infects cells of
several species, including swine, human, and chicken. Ectopic expression of porcine aminopeptidase
N (APN) rendered non-susceptible cells susceptible to PDCoV infection and greatly enhance PDCoV
infection in HeLa cells [11]. This suggests that PDCoV has the potential to spread between species
and may be a threat to humans, as closely related viruses have led to outbreaks of deadly diseases
such as SARS and MERS [12,13]. PDCoV global distribution in swine and its potential for transmission
to multiple hosts are alarming. Pigs are the second largest livestock species and act as intermediate
hosts for multiple zoonotic transmissions, emphasizing the need for studying the zoonotic potential of
PDCoV and the development of antiviral drugs [14].
Given the lack of specific antiviral therapies to control PDCoV infection, searching for effective
small-molecule inhibitors active against PDCoV is a high research priority. Antiviral reagents include
directly acting antivirals (DAAs), which can directly act on viral components (proteins or genomes), and
host-acting antivirals (HAAs), which can act on hosts [15–17]. Although DAAs are more virus-specific,
viruses quickly develop resistance [18]. Antiviral methods based on host cellular mechanisms have
potential advantages in reducing virus drug resistance and dealing with viral emergencies. Therefore,
the search and development of HAAs has aroused more and more interest. An interesting feature of
HAAs is their broad-spectrum antiviral activity, which allows for immediate treatment without a lead
time being required to develop a specific therapy [19]. With the emergence of new viruses threatening
human health, the discovery of new functions in existing clinical drugs is often used in the screening of
modern emergency therapies. Traditional broad-spectrum antiviral drugs have shown antiviral activity
against many types of viruses [17]. For example, ribavirin has antiviral activity against Hantavirus [20],
H1N1 influenza virus [21], Dengue virus [22], and Chikungunya virus [23]. Therefore, the discovery of
new antiviral functions for existing clinical drugs is still an important strategy against PDCoV infection.
Here, the antiviral activities of LiCl and DG, which are both HAAs, were studied against PDCoV.
LiCl can inhibit the replication of a variety of viruses, including Herpesvirus type 1 (HSV-1) [24],
transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) [25], porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
(PRRSV) [26], pseudorabies virus (PRV) [27], and porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) [28]. LiCl
can also regulate apoptosis and promote resumption of the synthesis of host proteins in infected
cells [25,26]. Recent studies showed that LiCl could effectively inhibit the entry and replication of PEDV
in Vero cells in a dose-dependent manner [28]. In addition, LiCl can inhibit early and late apoptosis
induced by PEDV. PDCoV and PEDV belong to the family Coronaviridae and have similar genomic
structure. However, antiviral drugs against PDCoV have not been researched. Therefore, we explored
whether LiCl could inhibit infection by PDCoV. The licorice extract isolated from the rhizome of
Glycyrrhiza uralensis has a strong antiviral activity [29]. In recent years, licorice extracts have been
shown to have antiviral effects on many viruses including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [30],
hepatitis B virus (HBV) [31], hepatitis A virus (HAV) [32], SARS-CoV [33], infectious bronchitis virus
(IBV) [34], PRRSV [29], and PRV [27]. According to previous studies, DG pre-treatement inhibited
PRV infection in a dose-dependent manner and reduced apoptosis [27]. Glycyrrhizin and DG have
antiviral effect against SARS-CoV and IBV. Additionally, the water solubility of DG is better than that
of glycyrrhizin, so we chose to verify the effect of DG on PDCoV.
Here, we report that LiCl and DG inhibit the replication of the PDCoV strain SD2018/10 in
LLC-PK1 cells in a dose-dependent manner. The antiviral activity of LiCl mainly occurs at the early
stage of viral infection, while the antiviral activity of DG mainly occurs at the stage of viral attachment.
In addition, both drugs inhibited PDCoV-induced apoptosis in LLC-PK1 cells. Therefore, the potential
and theoretical bases of the two drugs as therapeutic drugs for PDCoV were validated.
