biomolecules
Article

Antiviral Action of Tryptanthrin Isolated from
Strobilanthes cusia Leaf against Human
Coronavirus NL63
Yu-Chi Tsai 1,2,3 , Chia-Lin Lee 4,5,6 , Hung-Rong Yen 6,7,8,9 , Young-Sheng Chang 2,3 ,
Yu-Ping Lin 3 , Su-Hua Huang 10 and Cheng-Wen Lin 1,2,3,6,10, *


PhD Program for Health Science and Industry, College of Health Care, China Medical University,
Taichung 40402, Taiwan; chijoan0805@gmail.com
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung 40402,
Taiwan; a0989016192@gmail.com
Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, China Medical University, Taichung 40402,
Taiwan; c20234@hotmail.com
Department of Cosmeceutics, China Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan; chlilee@mail.cmu.edu.tw
Chinese Medicine Research and Development Center, China Medical University Hospital,
Taichung 40447, Taiwan
Chinese Medicine Research Center, China Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan;
hungrongyen@gmail.com
Graduate Institute of Chinese Medicine, School of Chinese Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine,
China Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan
Department of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung 40447, Taiwan
Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine, Department of Medical Research, China Medical
University Hospital, Taichung 40447, Taiwan
Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Wufeng, Taichung 41354, Taiwan; shhuang@asia.edu.tw
Correspondence: cwlin@mail.cmu.edu.tw; Fax: 886-4-2205-7414

Strobilanthes cusia (Nees) Kuntze is a Chinese herbal medicine used in the treatment of
respiratory virus infections. The methanol extract of S. cusia leaf contains chemical components
such as β-sitosterol, indirubin, tryptanthrin, betulin, indigodole A, and indigodole B that have
diverse biological activities. However, the antiviral action of S. cusia leaf and its components against
human coronavirus remains to be elucidated. Human coronavirus NL63 infection is frequent among
immunocompromised individuals, young children, and in the elderly. This study investigated the
anti-Human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) activity of the methanol extract of S. cusia leaf and its
major components. The methanol extract of S. cusia leaf effectively inhibited the cytopathic effect (CPE)
and virus yield (IC50 = 0.64 µg/mL) in HCoV-NL63-infected cells. Moreover, this extract potently
inhibited the HCoV-NL63 infection in a concentration-dependent manner. Among the six components
identified in the methanol extract of S. cusia leaf, tryptanthrin and indigodole B (5aR-ethyltryptanthrin)
exhibited potent antiviral activity in reducing the CPE and progeny virus production. The IC50
values against virus yield were 1.52 µM and 2.60 µM for tryptanthrin and indigodole B, respectively.
Different modes of time-of-addition/removal assay indicated that tryptanthrin prevented the early
and late stages of HCoV-NL63 replication, particularly by blocking viral RNA genome synthesis
and papain-like protease 2 activity. Notably, tryptanthrin (IC50 = 0.06 µM) and indigodole B
(IC50 = 2.09 µM) exhibited strong virucidal activity as well. This study identified tryptanthrin as the
key active component of S. cusia leaf methanol extract that acted against HCoV-NL63 in a cell-type
independent manner. The results specify that tryptanthrin possesses antiviral potential against
HCoV-NL63 infection.
Keywords: Strobilanthes cusia; tryptanthrin; indigodole B; human coronavirus NL63; antiviral; virucidal
Strobilanthes cusia (Nees) Kuntze is a member of the family Acanthaceae, widely distributed
in northeast India, Bangladesh, southern China, the Himalayan region, Myanmar, and Taiwan [1].
S. cusia root and leaf extracts have been used extensively as a traditional herbal medicine with
anti-inflammatory, antipyretic, antimicrobial, and antiviral activities [2,3]. The S. cusia root (named
“Nan-Ban-Lan-Gen” in Chinese) has been commonly used to treat infections by respiratory virus, such
as influenza viruses, mumps virus, and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus [4,5].
Several bioactive components from the S. cusia root, including strobilanthes A, 3H-benzoxazolinone,
and aurantiamide acetate, have exhibited antiviral activity against influenza A and hepatitis B
virus infections [5,6]. The S. cusia leaf (called “Da-Ching-Yeh” in Chinese) is generally used for the
production of indigo dyes (Indigo Natruralis, named “Qing Dai” in Chinese), displaying antibacterial,
anti-inflammatory, and antipyretic properties [7,8]. S. cusia leaves contain effective chemical
components with antibacterial, anti-inflammatory and antitumor activities, including β-sitosterol,
indirubin, tryptanthrin (6,12-dihydro-6,12-dioxoindolo-(2,1-b)-quinazoline), betulin, indigodole A,
indigodole B (5aR-ethyltryptanthrin), strobilanthosides A–C, and phenylethanoidglycosides [9,10].
Notably, indirubin and its derivatives modulate influenza A virus-induced inflammation and have been
suggested as antiviral and immunomodulatory agents against influenza A virus infection [3,11–14].
β-sitosterol exerts an inhibitory effect on the in vitro enzymatic activity of SARS coronavirus 3C-like
protease [15]. However, the antiviral capability of S. cusia leaf extract is yet to be elucidated; clarifying
its properties will prove to be relevant to respiratory virus infections.
Human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) belongs to the family Coronaviridae, as denoted
shortly after the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) [16,17].
HCoV-NL63 is an enveloped virus with a single-strand, positive-sense RNA genome nearly 26–32 kb
in size [18]. The spike protein, the major envelope protein of HCoV-NL63, specifically binds to the
zinc peptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) identified as the receptor for pathogenic
coronaviruses SARS-CoV and COVID-19 (formerly known as Wuhan coronavirus, 2019-nCoV,
and SARS-CoV-2) [16–19]. The virus is prevalent during spring and winter seasons in temperate zone
countries. HCoV-NL63 is primarily associated with immunocompromised patients with respiratory
illnesses, young children, and the elderly [20]. Symptoms of HCoV-NL63 infection include common
cold, rhinorrhea, cough, fever, tachypnea, and obstructive laryngitis [21]. Recently, HCoV-NL63 induced
an outbreak of severe respiratory disease in long-term care institutions in Louisiana. In 20 cases with
patients aged between 66 and 96, six patients with pneumonia were hospitalized and three patients
died [22]. Moreover, HCoV-NL63 was isolated from the blood, urine, and stool samples of children
with febrile illness, causing systemic illness in rural Haiti [23]. HCoV-NL63 has become one of the
primary pathogens in respiratory viral diseases; however, there are no effective antivirals for treating
HCoV-NL63 infection.
This study explored the anti-HCoV-NL63 activity exhibited by the methanol extract of S. cusia
leaf and its major chemical components, including β-sitosterol, indirubin, tryptanthrin, betulin,
indigodole A, and indigodole B, by means of cytopathic effect (CPE), virus yield, infectivity,
time-of-addition/removal, and virucidal activity assays.
