Research

JAMA Cardiology | Original Investigation

Association of Cardiac Injury With Mortality
in Hospitalized Patients With COVID-19 in Wuhan
IMPORTANCE Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has resulted in considerable morbidity

Supplemental content

and mortality worldwide since December 2019. However, information on cardiac injury in
patients affected by COVID-19 is limited.
OBJECTIVE To explore the association between cardiac injury and mortality in patients with


Methods
Study Participants
Consecutive patients admitted to Renmin Hospital of Wuhan
University with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 were included in this retrospective cohort study, which was conducted from January 20, 2020, to February 10, 2020. Renmin
Hospital of Wuhan University, located in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China, was assigned responsibility for the treatment of
patients with severe COVID-19 by the Wuhan government. The
patients with COVID-19 enrolled in this study were diagnosed according to World Health Organization interim
guidance.4 The cases without cardiac biomarkers, including
values of high-sensitivity troponin I (hs-TNI) and creatinine kinase–myocardial band (CK-MB), were excluded.
This study was approved by the National Health Commission of China and the institutional review board at Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University (Wuhan, China). Written informed
consent was waived by the ethics commission of the designated hospital for patients with emerging infectious diseases.

Data Collection
The demographic characteristics (age and sex), clinical data
(symptoms, comorbidities, laboratory findings, treatments,
complications, and outcomes), laboratory findings, and results of cardiac examinations (cardiac biomarkers and electrocardiography) for participants during hospitalization were collected from electronic medical records by 2 investigators (S.S.
and B.S.). Cardiac biomarkers measured on admission were collected, including hs-TNI, CK-MB, and myohemoglobin. The radiologic assessments included chest radiography or computed tomography. All data were independently reviewed and
entered into the computer database by 2 analysts (T.L. and Y.C.).
Patients were categorized according to the presence or absence of cardiac injury. Cardiac injury was defined as blood levels of cardiac biomarkers (hs-TNI) above the 99th-percentile
upper reference limit, regardless of new abnormalities in
E2

Key Points
Question What is the incidence and significance of cardiac injury
in patients with COVID-19?
Findings In this cohort study of 416 consecutive patients with
confirmed COVID-19, cardiac injury occurred in 19.7% of patients
during hospitalization, and it was one independent risk factor for
in-hospital mortality.
Meaning Cardiac injury is a common condition among patients
hospitalized with COVID-19, and it is associated with higher risk of
in-hospital mortality.
Treatment Antiviral treatment, Glucocorticoids,Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy,Antibiotic treatment
