Veterinary Microbiology 237 (2019) 108398

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Veterinary Microbiology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/vetmic

Characterization of amino acid substitutions in feline coronavirus 3C-like
protease from a cat with feline infectious peritonitis treated with a protease
inhibitor

Krishani Dinali Pereraa, Athri D. Rathnayakeb, Hongwei Liuc, Niels C. Pedersenc,
William C. Groutasb, Kyeong-Ok Changa, Yunjeong Kima,
Department of Diagnostic Medicine and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA
Department of Chemistry, Wichita State University, Wichita, KS, USA
Center for Companion Animal Health, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, USA

Keywords:
Feline infectious peritonitis virus
3C-like protease
Antivirals
Genetic barrier
Feline coronavirus
Resistance
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a highly fatal disease caused by a virulent feline coronavirus in domestic and
wild cats. We have previously reported the synthesis of potent coronavirus 3C-like protease (3CLpro) inhibitors
and the efficacy of a protease inhibitor, GC376, in client-owned cats with FIP. In this study, we studied the effect
of the amino acid changes in 3CLpro of feline coronavirus from a feline patient who received antiviral treatment
for prolonged duration. We generated recombinant 3CLpro containing the identified amino acid changes (N25S,
A252S or K260 N) and determined their susceptibility to protease inhibitors in the fluorescence resonance energy
transfer assay. The assay showed that N25S in 3CLpro confers a small change (up to 1.68-fold increase in the
50% inhibitory concentration) in susceptibility to GC376, but other amino acid changes do not affect susceptibility. Modelling of 3CLpro carrying the amino acid changes was conducted to probe the structural basis for
these findings. The results of this study may explain the observed absence of clinical resistance to the long-term
antiviral treatment in the patients.
Coronaviruses are a group of diverse RNA viruses that can cause a
number of diseases in animals and humans. Coronaviruses have a
single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome and belong to the family
Coronaviridae, which are further classified into four genera, Alpha-,
Beta-, Gamma-, and Deltacoronaviruses (King et al., 2011). Feline coronaviruses belong to the genus Alphacoronavirus and are the causative
agent of enteritis in cats. Feline enteric coronavirus infections are quite
common in multi-cat environments, such as shelters, rescues and catteries. Since more than a third of the affected cats chronically shed
viruses in the stool and feline coronaviruses are relatively stable in the
environment, it is difficult to eliminate feline coronaviruses from the
affected cat populations (Addie et al., 2019; Pedersen et al., 2008). Cats
infected with feline coronaviruses may show mild to severe enteritis,
but they usually recover without complications. However, a small
number of cats may develop feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), a highly
fatal, systemic disease, following enteric coronavirus infection (Pedersen, 2009, 2014). The detailed mechanism of FIP development is
still elusive, but it is believed that FIP arises in individual cats through
altered viral tropism that allows viral replication in the macrophages
(Barker et al., 2013; Chang et al., 2012; Licitra et al., 2013; Pedersen
et al., 2009, 2012) in the presence of inadequate cellular immunity of
the affected cats (Pedersen, 2014). FIP are commonly described as wet
or dry forms based on the presence or absence of effusion, respectively,
but these forms may switch as the disease progresses in some cats. The
clinical signs of FIP are variable and depend on the affected organs and
may include fever, jaundice, effusion, weight loss or neurological signs
and ocular lesions (Pedersen, 2014). Although FIP is almost invariably
fatal once cats develop clinical signs, there is no commercially available
treatment licensed for FIP with only supportive treatment being available.
Following viral entry into host cells, coronaviruses produce viral
polyproteins composed of non-structural viral proteins, which are
subsequently cleaved into mature, functional viral proteins by virallyencoded 3C-like protease (3CLpro) and papain-like protease. The
released viral proteins form the replicase-transcriptase complex, which
is required for RNA replication and transcription of the subgenomic
RNAs, thus inhibition of viral proteases blocks viral replication. We
have previously reported the synthesis of protease inhibitors for feline
coronavirus (Kim et al., 2012a, 2013; Kim et al., 2015), and showed the
efficacy of one of the inhibitors, GC376, in cats with experimentally
induced FIP (Kim et al., 2016) and naturally-occurring FIP in a field
trial (Pedersen et al., 2018). We have also reported the amino acid
changes (N25S, A252S and K260 N) in the 3CLpro of feline coronavirus
collected from a patient who was treated with GC376 but did not show
clinical resistance to multiple rounds of treatment in the field trial
(Pedersen et al., 2018).
In this study, we assessed the effects of the amino acid changes in
the feline coronavirus 3CLpro against GC376 in florescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET) assay by generating 3CLpro carrying the amino
acid changes. We also conducted modelling of 3CLpro carrying the
amino acid changes and compared them with wild-type (pre-treatment)
3CLpro to probe the structural basis for these findings. The results
showed that N25S, but not A252S and K260 N, confers a statistically
significant but small reduction in susceptibility to GC376 with up to
1.68-fold increase in the 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50), compared
to that of wild-type 3CLpro. Interestingly, none of these amino acid
changes in 3CLpro decreased susceptibility to another 3CLpro inhibitor
(NPI52) that shares the similar structure with GC376. The results of this
study may explain the observed absence of clinical resistance to the
long-term antiviral treatment in the patients in the field trial.

(K260N) or triple (N25S, A252S and K260N) mutations were introduced
into WT 3CLpro gene using a QuickChange II site-directed mutagenesis
kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The WT and mutant clones were verified by
sequence analysis, and the clones were transformed into BL21 cells
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) for expression. Protein expression was induced in Luria Bertani broth with 1 mM isopropyl β-D-thiogalactopyranoside for 4–6 h at 37 °C. The 3CLpros were purified using Ni-NTA
affinity columns (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) and stored at −80 °C.
2.2.1. FRET assay
The activities of the expressed WT and mutant 3CLpros were determined in the FRET assay as described previously (Kim et al., 2012a).
Each 3CLpro in 25 μl of assay buffer was mixed with 25 μl of assay
buffer containing fluorogenic substrate (dabacyl-KTSAVLQ/SGFRKMEedans) in a 96-well imaging microplate. The assay buffer consists of
120 mM NaCl, 4 mM DTT, 50 mM HEPES and 30% Glycerol at pH 6.0.
Following the incubation of the plate at 37 °C for 30 min, fluorescence
was measured on a fluorescence microplate reader (FLx800, Biotek,
Winnooski, VT). Background (substrate only) was subtracted from the
fluorescence readings and the readings were compared among the
3CLpro using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s post
hoc test in GraphPad Prism version 6.07 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla,
CA).
After confirmation of the activity of the recombinant 3CLpros, inhibition assays using GC376 or NPI52 were conducted as previously
described (Kim et al., 2016, 2012a). Serial dilutions of GC376 or NPI52
in assay buffer were incubated with 25 μl of assay buffer containing
3CLpro at 37 °C for 30 min. The mixture was then added to 25 μl of
assay buffer containing fluorogenic substrate in a 96 well plate. The
plate was further incubated at 37 °C for 30 min and the fluorescence
readings were measured on a florescence microplate reader. Relative
fluorescence was calculated by subtracting background fluorescence
from each fluorescence reading. The IC50 of each compound was calculated by non-linear regression analysis (four-parameter variable
slope) using GraphPad Prism software. At least four independent experiments were conducted to determine the IC50 values, and a twotailed student’s t-test was used for statistical comparison between the
IC50 values.

