Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews 14 (2020) 241e246

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/dsx

Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in the treatment of COVID-19
with or without diabetes: A systematic search and a narrative review
with a special reference to India and other developing countries
Awadhesh Kumar Singh a, *, Akriti Singh b, Altamash Shaikh c, Ritu Singh a,
Anoop Misra d, e, f
a

G. D Hospital & Diabetes Institute, Kolkata, India
College of Medicine & JNM Hospital, Kalyani, Nadia, West Bengal, India
Saifee Hospital, Mumbai, India
Fortis CDOC Hospital for Diabetes and Allied Sciences, Chirag Enclave, New Delhi, India
National Diabetes, Obesity and Cholesterol Foundation, New Delhi, India
Diabetes Foundation (India), New Delhi, India

Background and aims: No drugs are currently approved for Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19),
although some have been tried. In view of recent studies and discussion on chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), we aimed to review existing literature and relevant websites regarding these drugs
and COVID-19, adverse effects related to drugs, and related guidelines.
Aims and methods: We systematically searched the PubMed database up till March 21, 2020 and
retrieved all the articles published on chloroquine and HCQ and COVID-19.
Results: Two small human studies have been conducted with both these drugs in COVID-19, and have
shown signiﬁcant improvement in some parameters in patients with COVID-19.
Conclusion: Considering minimal risk upon use, a long experience of use in other diseases, costeffectiveness and easy availability across India, we propose that both these drugs are worthy of fast
track clinical trial for treatment, and may be carefully considered for clinical use as experimental drugs.
Since HCQ has been approved for treatment of diabetes in India, it should be further researched in
diabetes and COVID-19, a subgroup where signiﬁcant mortality has been shown.
© 2020 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
COVID-19
Chloroquine
Hydroxychloroquine
Diabetes

Novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), ofﬁcially known as severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the etiological
agent of the (Corona Virus Disease 2019) COVID-19, emerged in
Wuhan, Hubei province, China. On 11th March 2020, The World
Health Organization (WHO) declared this disease as pandemic [1].
Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention showed an
increased mortality in people with diabetes (2.3% vs. 7.3%; overall
vs. in patients with diabetes respectively) from a report of 72,314
cases of COVID-19 [2]. People with diabetes and COVID-19 may
need special attention and clinical care [3]. In the absence of any
known efﬁcient therapy and because of the situation of a “publichealth emergency”, many drugs have been tried recently in the
treatment for COVID-19 that includes a low-cost antimalarial drug
chloroquine and its derivative hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), along
with several other antiviral drugs. Because HCQ has been approved
in the treatment of type 2 diabetes in India since 2014 as a third- or
fourth-line drug, it would be interesting to research its impact in
patients with diabetes, infected with COVID-19.
Reports gathered so far have suggested that a number of drugs
could be potential candidates for the treatment of COVID-19, although
the clinical effectiveness of these drugs have not yet been fully evaluated. The list of these drugs has been summarized in Table 1 [4e6].
In this review article, we have systematically searched the
medical data base until March 21, 2020 and collated all the available
evidences that have emerged so far on the efﬁcacy of chloroquine
and hydroxychloroquine, in the treatment of patients with COVID-
4Not clearly known, changes the pH of endosomes and
aminoquinoline believed to prevent viral entry, transport and postentry events
Hydroxychloroquine 4Not clearly known, changes the pH of endosomes and
aminoquinoline believed to prevents viral entry, transport and postentry events
Inhibits viral application
Remdesivir
Adenosine
nucleotide
analogues
Ribavirin
Nucleoside
Inhibits viral RNA synthesis and mRNA capping
analogue
Ribavirin plus
Inhibits viral replication
Interferon
Camostat Mesilate Protease
Blocks viral maturation and entry to cells
inhibitors
Lopinavir/Ritonavir Protease
Blocks viral cellular entry
inhibitors
Darunavir/Cobicistat Protease
Blocks viral cellular entry
inhibitors
Inhibits infection of cells by SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, approved for malaria
treatment and prophylaxis
Inhibits infection of cells by SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, approved for malaria
prophylaxis and autoimmune disease (e.g. rheumatic diseases). Approved for
treatment of T2DM in India
Effective against SARS and MERS
