Emerging Microbes & Infections

ISSN: (Print) 2222-1751 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/temi20

Clinical observation and management of COVID-19
patients
Taisheng Li, Hongzhou Lu & Wenhong Zhang
To cite this article: Taisheng Li, Hongzhou Lu & Wenhong Zhang (2020) Clinical observation
and management of COVID-19 patients, Emerging Microbes & Infections, 9:1, 687-690, DOI:
10.1080/22221751.2020.1741327
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2020.1741327

© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group, on behalf of Shanghai Shangyixun
Cultural Communication Co., Ltd
Published online: 25 Mar 2020.

Clinical observation and management of COVID-19 patients
Taisheng Lia, Hongzhou Lub and Wenhong Zhangc

Department of Infectious Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, People’s Republic of China; bShanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China; cDepartment of
Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China.

Three leading infectious disease experts in China were invited to share their bedside observations in the management of
COVID-19 patients. Professor Taisheng Li was sent to Wuhan to provide frontline medical care. He depicts the clinical
course of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, he observes the signiﬁcant abnormality of coagulation function and
proposes that the early intravenous immunoglobulin and low molecular weight heparin anticoagulation therapy are
very important. Professor Hongzhou Lu, a leader in China to try various anti-viral drugs, expresses concern on the
quality of the ongoing clinical trials as most trials are small in scale and repetitive in nature, and emphasizes the
importance of the quick publication of clinical trial results. Regarding the traditional Chinese medicine, Professor Lu
suggests to develop a creative evaluation system because of the complicated chemical compositions. Professor
Wenhong Zhang is responsible for Shanghai’s overall clinical management of the COVID-19 cases. He introduces the
team approach to manage COVID-19 patients. For severe or critically ill patients, in addition to the respiratory
supportive treatment, timely multiorgan evaluation and treatment is very crucial. The medical decisions and
interventions are carefully tailored to the unique characteristics of each patient.
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 6 March 2020; Accepted 8 March 2020
KEYWORDS Clinical management; antiviral drugs; coronavirus; SARS; SARS-CoV-2

Since late 2019 to early 2020, the sudden outbreak of
COVID-19, among the general human population in
the City of Wuhan, caused by the transmission of a
novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 [1,2], has led to over
80,000 diagnosed cases including more than 3000
deaths globally as of 29 February 2020. While the overall mortality rate for SARS-CoV-2 seems lower than
SARS or MERS, the death rate among severe cases
infected by SARS-CoV-2 is alarming. There are a
wide range of eﬀorts to develop special treatments for
COVID-19 with limited success. In the current commentary, EMI invited three leading infectious disease
experts in China who have personally participated in
the clinical management of COVID-19 cases to share
their bedside observations and to suggest what may
be important in formulating the treatment strategy to
optimize the clinical outcome.

Professor Taisheng Li (being sent to Wuhan
from Beijing to provide frontline care to the
COVID-19 cases in a local hospital)
Since 7 February 2020, my colleagues and I went to work
in the intensive care unit (ICU) of Zhongfa Xincheng

Hospital, part of Tongji Hospital in Wuhan. Although
the case fatality rate of COVID-19 is not high, due to
the widespread of the disease, the total number of deaths
is not small. Based on my observations in the treatment
of severe and critically ill patients in the ICU, I propose
that the early intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and
low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) anticoagulation therapy are very important.
Clinical course of COVID-19
When SARS-CoV-2 infects a person, the lesions are
not limited to the lungs. The virus causes viraemia
after entering the body and the main clinical manifestations are fever, pharyngalgia, fatigue, diarrhoea and
other non-speciﬁc symptoms [3,4]. This process
includes the incubation phase and the early phase of
the disease. The incubation takes 1–14 days (3–7
days being common). Peripheral blood leucocytes
and lymphocytes are not signiﬁcantly reduced (normal or slightly lower) at this phase. Then, the viruses
spread through the bloodstream and mainly in the
lungs, gastrointestinal tract, and heart, presumably
concentrated in the tissues expressing ACE2, the