Engineering xxx (xxxx) xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Engineering
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eng

Research
Corona Virus Disease 2019—Article

Clinical Study of Mesenchymal Stem Cell Treatment for Acute
Respiratory Distress Syndrome Induced by Epidemic Influenza
A (H7N9) Infection: A Hint for COVID-19 Treatment
Jiajia Chen a,y, Chenxia Hu a,y, Lijun Chen a,y, Lingling Tang b, Yixin Zhu b, Xiaowei Xu a, Lu Chen c,
Hainv Gao b, Xiaoqing Lu a, Liang Yu a, Xiahong Dai b, Charlie Xiang a,⇑, Lanjuan Li a,b,⇑
State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis
and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China
The Shulan (Hangzhou) Hospital, Affiliated to Shulan International Medical College, Zhejiang Shuren University, Hangzhou 310003, China
Innovative Precision Medicine (IPM) Group, Hangzhou 311215, China

Keywords:
H7N9
Mesenchymal stem cell
Epidemic Influenza A
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
COVID-19
Stem cell therapeutics


H7N9 viruses quickly spread between mammalian hosts and carry the risk of human-to-human transmission, as shown by the 2013 outbreak. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), lung failure, and fulminant pneumonia are major lung diseases in H7N9 patients. Transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) is a promising choice for treating virus-induced pneumonia, and was used to treat H7N9-induced
ARDS in 2013. The transplant of MSCs into patients with H7N9-induced ARDS was conducted at a single
center through an open-label clinical trial. Based on the principles of voluntariness and informed consent,
44 patients with H7N9-induced ARDS were included as a control group, while 17 patients with H7N9induced ARDS acted as an experimental group with allogeneic menstrual-blood-derived MSCs. It was
notable that MSC transplantation significantly lowered the mortality of the experimental group, compared with the control group (17.6% died in the experimental group while 54.5% died in the control
group). Furthermore, MSC transplantation did not result in harmful effects in the bodies of four of the
patients who were part of the five-year follow-up period. Collectively, these results suggest that MSCs
significantly improve the survival rate of H7N9-induced ARDS and provide a theoretical basis for the
treatment of H7N9-induced ARDS in both preclinical research and clinical studies. Because H7N9 and
the corona virus disease 2019 (COVID-19) share similar complications (e.g., ARDS and lung failure) and
corresponding multi-organ dysfunction, MSC-based therapy could be a possible alternative for treating
COVID-19.

Influenza A viruses (IAVs) are divided into multiple subtypes
according to diversified viral surface antigens and two major
pathotypes, including high and low pathogenicity for chicken
[1,2]. Among these IAVs, all avian viruses with high pathogenicity
have belonged to the H5/H7 subtype until recently [3]. A novel
avian-original influenza virus emerged in the spring of 2013 and
unfortunately led to severe and fatal respiratory disease in humans
[4]. This novel virus has a similar phylogenetic genome to a virus
⇑ Corresponding authors.
y isolated from chicken found in a live poultry market [4]. H7N9
virus is one of many reassortant viruses, which are primarily
derived from the H7N3, H7N9, and H9N2 subtypes of IAVs [5–7].
Although H7N9 is pathogenically low in chickens [8], humans are
much more susceptible to transmission, particularly at live poultry
markets after intimate contact with H7N9-infected chickens [4,9].
H7N9 viruses are able to spread between mammalian hosts (ferrets) without losing virulence [10], and genetic mutations of
H7N9 virus confer the risk of human-to-human transmission
[11–13], as demonstrated in a few family clusters infected by this
virus [14,15]. There have been six seasonal epidemics since the
first case emerged in 2013, and the epidemic resurgence of
the virus in mainland China since 2016 suggests that it has become
more virulent [16,17]. Therefore, defending against H7N9-induced
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) will be instrumental in
curing H7N9 patients.
ARDS, lung failure, and fulminant pneumonia are major lung
diseases in H7N9 patients, and H7N9 virus causes extrapulmonary
diseases including rhabdomyolysis and encephalopathy through
cytokine storms in vivo [4,18,19]. There is currently no vaccine
available for preventing H7N9 infections. Other extensive therapeutic interventions (e.g., extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT)) have
been applied to infectious patients with severe H7N9 [20–22].
However, dealing with the antiviral resistance of H7N9 and
secondary-infection-induced multiple organ dysfunction in
patients is still a serious concern, and there is an exigent demand
to explore an effective strategy against H7N9 infection in humans.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has
garnered global attention for causing the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) in Wuhan, China [23–25]. The number of infected
patients has risen rapidly due to a lack of sufficient awareness,
proximity between people, ease of mobility, and the human-tohuman transmission ability of the virus [26–29]. At presnet, there
is no effective way to cure COVID-19. H7N9 and COVID-19 share
similar complications (e.g., ARDS and lung failure) and corresponding multi-organ dysfunction with lung inflammatory lesions and
structural damage [24,30]. Hence, a breakthrough in treatment
strategy for H7N9 infection in humans would be critical for treating COVID-19—and especially ARDS-induced severe pneumonia,
which is currently causing panic around the world.
Because efforts to control lung injury via pharmacological
agents have been unsuccessful, mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)based therapy is being investigated, based on MSC’s limitless
self-renewal and multipotency. Furthermore, MSC-based therapies
demonstrated promising effects in the experimental treatment
of ARDS via inhibition of alveolar collapse, collagen accumulation,
and cell apoptosis in lung tissue. Recently, Wilson et al. [31] found
that administrating allogeneic MSCs in nine patients with ARDS
resulted in no pre-specified adverse events, including hypoxaemia,
cardiac arrhythmia, and ventricular tachycardia. Menstrual-bloodderived MSCs are currently attracting interest due to source potential, a high proliferation rate, and a painless procedure that is free
of ethical issues [32–34].
This study is the first trial to test menstrual-blood-derived MSCs
in patients with H7N9-induced ARDS. We report the effects of
transplantation at different stages of ARDS and assess the longterm safety and the improvement of pulmonary function from
H7N9 infection after MSC transplantation. Our study not only contributes to this field as a pilot clinical study showing the function of
MSCs in H7N9-induced ARDS, but also suggests that MSCs are a
promising tool for treating acute pneumonia in future clinical use.