Habib et al. BMC Infectious Diseases
(2019) 19:870
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-019-4555-5

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Clinical outcomes among hospital patients
with Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection
Abdulrahman Mohammed G. Habib1, Mohamed Abd Elghafour Ali1, Baha R. Zouaoui1, Mustafa Ahmed H. Taha1,
Bassem Sahsah Mohammed2 and Nazmus Saquib1*


Background: Mortality is high among patients with Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV)
infection. We aimed to determine hospital mortality and the factors associated with it in a cohort of MERS-CoV
patients.
Methods: We reviewed hospital records of confirmed cases (detection of virus by polymerase chain reaction from
respiratory tract samples) of MERS-CoV patients (n = 63) admitted to Buraidah Central Hospital in Al-Qassim, Saudi
Arabia between 2014 and 2017. We abstracted data on demography, vital signs, associated conditions presented on
admission, pre-existing chronic diseases, treatment, and vital status. Bi-variate comparisons and multiple logistic
regressions were the choice of data analyses.
Results: The mean age was 60 years (SD = 18.2); most patients were male (74.6%) and Saudi citizens (81%). All but
two patients were treated with Ribavirin plus Interferon. Hospital mortality was 25.4%. Patients who were admitted
with septic shock and/or organ failure were significantly more likely to die than patients who were admitted with
pneumonia and/or acute respiratory distress syndrome (OR = 47.9, 95% CI = 3.9, 585.5, p-value 0.002). Age, sex, and
presence of chronic conditions were not significantly associated with mortality.
Conclusion: Hospital mortality was 25%; septic shock/organ failure at admittance was a significant predictor of
mortality.
Keywords: Ribavirin, Interferon alpha, MERS-CoV, Mortality

The Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
(MERS-CoV) infection is a recent and fatal disease, detected first in Saudi Arabia, where the majority of cases
have so far occurred. Subsequently, it spread through
the Arabian Peninsula and into neighbouring Middle
Eastern countries before it became a global concern,
reaching as far as the Korean Peninsula. By February
2018, its presence was detected in 27 countries worldwide, with 2144 recorded cases, out of which 750 resulted in death [1]. MERS-CoV is a contagious disease
caused by C lineage of β-coronavirus. The infection can
occur either through exposure with an infected animal
or human [2]. Dromedary camels are believed to have
been the carrier of MERS-CoV for decades as camels of
the Middle Eastern region appear to be the only zoonotic host able to transmit infection to humans [3].
There is evidence of super spreading of infection (i.e., a
single patient infects a disproportionate number of contacts) in MERS-CoV, and therefore, healthcare workers
who provide support to infected patients are particularly
vulnerable [4]. The disease exhibits a wide range of presentations at diagnosis, e.g., from no symptoms to subtle
signs of pneumonia to multi-organ failure, and has the
capacity to progress rapidly to cause death [5, 6]. At
present, there is no effective vaccine available to prevent
this fatal infection [1].

There have been both animal and human studies on
treatment efficacy for MERS-CoV infection. A common
form of treatment is antiviral drugs that target specific
parts of the S protein in MERS-CoV. These are known
as anti-MERS-CoV neutralizing monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs), anti-dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) mAbs, peptidic fusion inhibitors, siRNA, and others [7]. MERSCoV binds with DPP4, which is found on the surface of
cells in the lungs and kidneys. Protein-targeting mAbs in
mice were not reported to have given in vivo protection
from MERS-CoV; nevertheless, mAbs variants, including
mersmab1, 2E6 and 4C2, were found to prevent entry
into DPP4 cells and effectively neutralise live MERSCoV infection in mice [8, 9]. DPP4 antagonists target
the receptor-binding domain (RBD), competing with and
inhibiting MERS-CoV infection. The DPP4 antagonists
used in ferrets were found to be highly protective against
MERS-CoV entry [10]. Multiple RBD-mAbs were found
to elicit protective and therapeutic abilities against
MERS-CoV infectivity in humanised DPP4 mice and
other variants, as well as in rhesus monkeys [8, 11–13].
The drugs that have been tested in humans included
Interferon (alpha and beta), antiviral nucleoside analogues (Ribavirin), serine protease inhibitors (Camostat),
immunosuppressant (cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil), monoclonal antibodies, and broad-spectrum antivirals (Nitazoxanide) [14]. In one study, multiple regimens
were tested including mycophenolate mofetil, Interferon
alpha and beta with or without ribavirin combination,
and hydrocortisone [15]. Similarly, the efficacy of
Interferon-beta with lopinavir-ritonavir has been the
focus of an on-going clinical trial [16]. The most widely
tested regimen, however, has been Ribavirin in combination with Interferon. This regimen has been found effective in reducing the virus replication ‘in vitro’ [17]. It
has also modulated the host response and improved the
clinical outcome in animal experiments [18].
Clinical outcomes of MERS-Cov patients varied substantially among previous studies. For example, hospital
mortality was as low as 4% in one study [19] but as high
as 100% in another study [20]. In a majority of studies,
the mortality ranged between 20 and 60% [6, 21–28].
Small sample sizes (5, 14, 20, and 31) in some of the included studies likely contributed in the variation of the
morality estimate [6, 20, 21, 29]. Additionally, the mortality rate was influenced by the patients’ demography
(e.g., age), physical conditions at admission (e.g., fever,
shock, organ failure etc.), pre-existing diseases such diabetes or hypertension, or choice of treatment [26, 30].
We, therefore, present data of a larger clinical study
(n = 63) of confirmed cases of MERS-CoV patients who
were admitted to a referral hospital in the Al-Qassim region of Saudi Arabia between 2014 and 2017. 