BioScience Trends. 2020; 14(1):64-68.

Brief Report

DOI: 10.5582/bst.2020.01030

Clinical characteristics and therapeutic procedure for four cases
with 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia receiving combined
Chinese and Western medicine treatment
Zhenwei Wang1, Xiaorong Chen2, Yunfei Lu2, Feifei Chen3, Wei Zhang3,*


Department of Respiratory Disease, Yueyang Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China;

Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Shanghai, China;
Department of Respiratory Disease, Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) is continuously and rapidly
circulating at present. No effective antiviral treatment has been verified thus far. We report here the
clinical characteristics and therapeutic procedure for four patients with mild or severe 2019-nCoV
pneumonia admitted to Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center. All the patients were given antiviral
treatment including lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra®), arbidol, and Shufeng Jiedu Capsule (SFJDC,
a traditional Chinese medicine) and other necessary support care. After treatment, three patients
gained significant improvement in pneumonia associated symptoms, two of whom were confirmed
2019-nCoV negative and discharged, and one of whom was virus negative at the first test. The
remaining patient with severe pneumonia had shown signs of improvement by the cutoff date for
data collection. Results obtained in the current study may provide clues for treatment of 2019-nCoV
pneumonia. The efficacy of antiviral treatment including lopinavir/ritonavir, arbidol, and SFJDC
warrants further verification in future study.

Keywords

2019-nCoV, lopinavir, ritonavir, arbidol, Shufeng Jiedu Capsule

Coronaviruses mainly cause respiratory tract infections
and some strains have high infectivity and mortality
as well as heavy damage on public health, such as
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle
East respiratory syndrome (MERS) (1). A pneumonia
associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019nCoV) emerged in Wuhan, China in December, 2019
and has spread rapidly, with 24,324 confirmed cases in
mainland China as of February 4, 2020 (2,3). The most
common clinical presentation is fever, fatigue, and dry
cough and some patients present with nasal congestion,
runny nose, and diarrhea (4). In severe cases, dyspnea
usually occurs one week after the disease onset and
some patients can rapidly progress to acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS), septic shock, refractory
metabolic acidosis, and coagulation disorders (4).
Thus far, there is no approved or verified effective
drugs specific to the virus (5). We report here that four
patients with mild or severe 2019-nCoV pneumonia
have been cured or have significant improvement
in their respiratory symptoms after treatment with
combined lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra®), arbidol, and
Shufeng Jiedu Capsule (SFJDC, a traditional Chinese
medicine) on the base of supportive care.
