BioScience Trends. 2020; 14(1):1-2.

Editorial


DOI: 10.5582/bst.2020.01056

COVID-19: Real-time dissemination of scientific information to
fight a public health emergency of international concern
Peipei Song1, Takashi Karako2,3,*


Institute for Global Health Policy Research, Bureau of International Health Cooperation, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan;
International Health Care Center, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan;
Department of Surgery, the University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Rapidly sharing scientific information is an effective way to reduce public panic about COVID-19,
and doing so is the key to providing real-time guidance to epidemiologists working to contain the
outbreak, clinicians managing patients, and modelers helping to understand future developments and
the possible effectiveness of various interventions. This issue has rapidly reviewed and published
articles describing COVID-19, including the drug treatment options for SARS-CoV-2, its clinical
characteristics, and therapies involving a combination of Chinese and Western medicine, the efficacy
of chloroquine phosphate in the treatment of COVID-19 associated pneumonia according to clinical
studies, and reflections on the system of reserve medical supplies for public health emergencies. As an
academic journal, we will continue to quickly and transparently share data with frontline healthcare
workers who need to know the epidemiological and clinical features of COVID-19.

Keywords 2019-nCoV, SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, sharing data

A novel coronavirus, formerly designated 2019-nCoV
and now taxonomically termed SARS-CoV-2, emerged
in Wuhan, China at the end of 2019 and rapidly
spread through many countries in Asia and elsewhere
worldwide. This incident was labeled a public health
emergency of international concern (PHEIC) on Jan.
30, 2020 (1). This is the 6th time WHO has declared a
PHEIC since the International Health Regulations (IHR)
came into effect in 2005.
The clinical condition caused by SARS-CoV-2 has
been designated COVID-19 by the WHO. As of Feb.
23, 2020, WHO reported a total of 77,042 confirmed
cases and 2,445 deaths in China and 1,769 confirmed
cases and 17 deaths in 28 other countries (2). The
rapid increase in infections and deaths caused anxiety,
panic, stigma, mistrust, and rumor-mongering among
public.
Rapidly sharing scientific information is an
effective way to reduce public panic, and it is the key
to providing real-time guidance to epidemiologists
working to contain the outbreak, clinicians managing
patients, and modelers helping to understand future
developments and the possible effectiveness of various
interventions.
This information includes routes of transmission
and transmissibility, the natural history of infection in
humans, the populations at risk, the successful clinical
practices that are being used to manage patients, the
laboratory information needed to diagnose patients, and
the genetic sequence information used to assess viral
stability.
Scientists from numerous countries have published
and analyzed the genome of the pathogen responsible,
SARS-CoV-2 (3-5). On Jan. 2020, a study that analyzed
data on the first 425 confirmed cases in Wuhan, China
provided evidence of human-to-human transmission
among close contacts and suggested that measures
to prevent or reduce transmission be implemented
in populations at risk (6). Two studies published in
Jan. 2020 described the epidemiological and clinical
features of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 in 41 and
99 patients, respectively, in Wuhan (7,8). On Feb. 9,
2020, a study involving 1,099 laboratory-confirmed
cases at 552 hospitals was published online to provide
an up-to-date delineation of the epidemiological and
clinical characteristics of COVID-19 throughout
mainland China (9). The study's findings encourage a
shift in focus to identifying and managing patients at an
earlier stage, before disease progression. In addition to
confirmed cases from China, several reports identified
clusters of locally transmitted cases in other countries,
adding to the understanding of this disease.


To prompt real-time sharing of scientific
information, many international academic journals have
rapidly reviewed and published articles on COVID-19.
Several coronavirus websites have also been created
to assemble and disclose articles on this disease, such
as the NEJM Coronavirus page, the Lancet COVID-19
Resource Centre, and the Cell Press Coronavirus
Resource Hub. In order to overcome the language
barrier, many articles have also been translated into
Chinese to directly benefit frontline health professionals
and policy makers in China as well as to reduce public
panic; epidemiological information and scientific
articles in Chinese have also been widely cited and
rapidly reported in English. Broad dissemination in
both Chinese and English will accomplish the goal
of promptly communicating crucial findings to the
international scientific community.
We still have a lot to learn about SARS-CoV-2
and the disease it causes, COVID-19. The real-time
dissemination of scientific information is needed most
during this period of uncertainty. Academic journals
are responsible for facilitating the rapid dissemination
of reliable information including transparent
methods of identifying cases, sharing data, unfettered
communication, and peer-reviewed research.
Since its inception in 2007, our journal ‒ BioScience
Trends ‒ has highlighted the research on and dissemination
of information regarding public health emergencies,
leading us to publish articles on topics such as SARS,
Ebola, MERS, avian influenza A H5N1, H1N1, and
H7N9.
In this issue, we rapidly reviewed and published
articles describing COVID-19, including the drug
treatment options for SARS-CoV-2, its clinical
characteristics, and therapies involving a combination
of Chinese and Western medicine, the efficacy of
chloroquine phosphate in the treatment of COVID-19
associated pneumonia according to clinical studies, and
the reflections on the system of reserve medical supplies
for public health emergencies.
As an academic journal, we will continue to quickly
and transparently share data with frontline healthcare
workers who need to know the epidemiological and
clinical features of COVID-19.

