REVIEW PAPERS

DOI: https://doi.org/10.5114/ait.2020.93756

COVID-19 – what should anaethesiologists
and intensivists know about it?
Magdalena A. Wujtewicz1, Anna Dylczyk-Sommer1, Aleksander Aszkiełowicz1,
Szymon Zdanowski2, Sebastian Piwowarczyk2, Radosław Owczuk1
Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland
Students’ Scientific Society at the Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland

Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 2020; 52, 1: 34–41

Over the past three months, the world has faced an unprecedented health hazard.
The World Health Organization has announced a pandemia infection with an unknown
species of coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2. Spreading mainly through the droplet route,
the virus causes mild symptoms in the majority of cases, the most common being: fever
(80%), dry cough (56%), fatigue (22%) and muscle pain (7%); less common symptoms
include a sore throat, a runny nose, diarrhea, hemoptysis and chills. A life-threatening
complication of SARS-CoV-2 infection is an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
which occurs more often in older adults, those with immune disorders and co-morbidities. Severe forms of the infection, being an indication for treatment in the intensive
care unit, comprise acute lung inflammation, ARDS, sepsis and septic shock. The article
presents basic information about etiology, pathogenesis and diagnostics (with particular emphasis on the importance of tomocomputer imaging), clinical picture, treatment
and prevention of the infection. It goes on to emphasize the specific risks of providing
anesthesiology and intensive care services. Due to the fact that effective causal treatment is not yet available and the number of infections and deaths increases day by
day, infection prevention and strict adherence to recommendations of infection control
organizations remain the basis for fighting the virus.
Key words: viruses, SARS-CoV-2, infection, COVID-19, acute pneumonia, acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).

In the last months of 2019, disturbing news from
China began to spread around the world about the
increased incidence of viral infections, which turned
out to be caused by a coronavirus. It was originally
referred to as 2019-nCov, now as SARS-CoV-2; the
disease it caused has been named COVID-19 by the
World Health Organization (WHO) (11 February 2020).
At present it is known that the virus has reached
Europe (including Poland) and the highest number
of cases has been recorded in the northern part of
Italy. The knowledge regarding epidemiology is
changing dynamically, so is the scope of information about the virus. This paper aims to provide upto-date information on COVID-19, which should be
important for anaesthetists, intensivists and trainees in this specialty. We are aware that new findings
are reported every day; therefore, it is essential to
keep track of online sources of information, including websites of the Ministry of Health and the Chief
Sanitary Inspector. The most important guidelines
and updates on COVID-19 are being translated into



