Autoimmunity Reviews xxx (xxxx) xxxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Autoimmunity Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/autrev

COVID-19 infection and rheumatoid arthritis: Faraway, so close!
Ennio Giulio Favallia, , Francesca Ingegnolia,b, Orazio De Luciaa, Gilberto Cincinellib,
Rolando Cimazb,c, Roberto Caporalia,b


Division of Clinical Rheumatology, ASST Gaetano Pini-CTO Institute, Milan, Italy
Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Research Center for Adult and Pediatric Rheumatic Diseases, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, ASST Gaetano Pini-CTO Institute, Milan, Italy
Keywords:
Rheumatoid arthritis
COVID-19
Treatment
DMARDs
Cytokine release syndrome
Coronavirus

The outbreak of the new coronavirus infections COVID-19 in December 2019 in China has quickly become a
global health emergency. Given the lack of specific anti-viral therapies, the current management of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronaviruses (SARS-CoV-2) is mainly supportive, even though several compounds are
now under investigation for the treatment of this life-threatening disease. COVID-19 pandemic is certainly
conditioning the treatment strategy of a complex disorder as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), whose infectious risk is
increased compared to the general population because of an overall impairment of immune system typical of
autoimmune diseases combined with the iatrogenic effect generated by corticosteroids and immunosuppressive
drugs. However, the increasing knowledge about the pathophysiology of SARS-CoV-2 infection is leading to
consider some anti-rheumatic drugs as potential treatment options for the management of COVID-19. In this
review we will critically analyse the evidences on either positive or negative effect of drugs commonly used to
treat RA in this particular scenario, in order to optimize the current approach to RA patients.

In December 2019 a new type of pneumonia supported by a novel
member of the coronoviridae family named SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute
respiratory coronavirus 2 syndrome) developed from Wuhan Province
in China [1]. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that this is a different
virus with ~80% nucleotide identity with SARS-CoV-1 [2]. The disease
caused by SARS-CoV-2 is characterized by dry cough, fever, dyspnea
and fatigue, accompanied by lymphopenia [3–6]. In more severe cases
(apparently up to 15–20% of infected patients) the picture may become
more complicated by the onset of interstitial pneumonia with alveolar
damage, which clinically can lead to severe Acute Respiratory Distress
Syndrome (ARDS) and even death [7]. Since the initial outbreak, the
epidemic has had a rapid global spread worldwide which led the World
Health Organization (WHO) to declare the disease now called COVID19 a Public Health Emergency of International Concern on 30th January 2020 and a pandemic on 11th March 2020. The epidemiological
picture is constantly evolving, and data updated as of March 17th count
159 countries involved with more than 185,000 cases and 7500 confirmed deaths [8].
In this context of growing health emergency, clarifying the relationship between COVID-19 and the population of fragile patients
suffering from immune-rheumatological diseases is absolutely crucial.
On the one hand, the rapid and uncontrolled spread of the epidemic can
clearly generate even more concerns in rheumatic patients, which are
intrinsically characterized by an increased infectious risk due to the
disease itself and to the iatrogenic effect of immunosuppressive agents
such as corticosteroids and synthetic or biological disease-modifying
drugs [9]. On the other hand, the growing knowledge about the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 infection is leading to the introduction of
drugs commonly used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
even for the management of more complex cases of COVID-19. Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have now been permanently included,
alongside antiviral drugs, in protocols for the treatment of COVID-19
pneumonia [10]. In addition, the use of interleukin 6 (IL-6) blockers
seems to be very promising for the management of the massive cytokine
storm associated to the development of the typical lung damage and the
consequent ARDS occurring in the most aggressive patterns of SARSCoV infection [11].
Therefore, waiting for observational data on the incidence of
COVID-19 in rheumatological patients, the best strategy to manage
immune-rheumatological diseases during this emergency period is still
far to be clear. 