G Model

ARTICLE IN PRESS

MEDMAL-4280; No. of Pages 3

Médecine et maladies infectieuses xxx (2020) xxx–xxx

Department of Intensive Care Unit, People’s hospital of Qiandongnan Miao and Dong Autonomous Prefecture, Kaili Guizhou 556000, China

Keywords :
COVID-19
C-reactive protein
Lung CT scan

COVID-19 is a new infectious disease, for which there is currently no treatment. It is
therefore necessary to explore biomarkers to determine the extent of lung lesions and disease severity.
Objective. – We aimed to assess the usefulness of CRP levels in the early stage of COVID-19 and to correlate
them with lung lesions and severe presentation.
Methods. – Conﬁrmed cases of COVID-19 were selected at the Fever Unit in two regions of Guizhou, China.
On admission CRP levels were collected, and the diameter of the largest lung lesion was measured in the
most severe lung lesion by lung CT scan. Differences in the diameter and CRP levels were compared in
the following groups of patients: mild group, moderate group, severe group, and critical group.
Result. – CRP levels and the diameter of the largest lung lesion in the moderate group were higher than
those in the mild group (Mann-Whitney test = −2.647, −2.171, P < 0.05), those in the severe group were
higher than those in the moderate group (Mann-Whitney test = 0.693, −2.177, P < 0.05), and those in the
critical group were higher than those in the severe group (Mann-Whitney test = −0.068, −1.549, P < 0.05).
The difference was statistically signiﬁcant. CRP levels were positively correlated with the diameter of lung
lesion and severe presentation (correlation coefﬁcient = 0.873, 0.734, P < 0.001).
Conclusion. – In the early stage of COVID-19 CRP levels were positively correlated with lung lesions and
could reﬂect disease severity.

New coronavirus pneumonia (COVID-19) is a health emergency
due to its high infectiousness [1] and high case fatality in critically ill
patients. The pathological and physiological processes and diagnostic methods of COVID-19 are still in the exploratory stage. Clinical
monitoring and appropriate treatment strategies were essential to
improve case fatality. CT scan played an important role in assessing
the disease [2]. Other sensitive indicators able to reﬂect lung lesion
changes and disease severity had to be explored. C-reactive protein
(CRP) levels can be used in the early diagnosis of pneumonia [3], and
patients presenting with severe pneumonia had high CRP levels.
We assessed the correlation between CRP levels, lung lesions, and
disease severity to provide reference for clinical treatment.
