Critical care management of adults
with community‑acquired severe respiratory
viral infection
Yaseen M. Arabi1,2,3* , Robert Fowler4,5,6 and Frederick G. Hayden7

With the expanding use of molecular assays, viral pathogens are increasingly recognized among critically ill adult
patients with community-acquired severe respiratory illness; studies have detected respiratory viral infections (RVIs)
in 17–53% of such patients. In addition, novel pathogens including zoonotic coronaviruses like the agents causing
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and the 2019 novel coronavirus
(2019 nCoV) are still being identified. Patients with severe RVIs requiring ICU care present typically with hypoxemic
respiratory failure. Oseltamivir is the most widely used neuraminidase inhibitor for treatment of influenza; data suggest that early use is associated with reduced mortality in critically ill patients with influenza. At present, there are
no antiviral therapies of proven efficacy for other severe RVIs. Several adjunctive pharmacologic interventions have
been studied for their immunomodulatory effects, including macrolides, corticosteroids, cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors,
sirolimus, statins, anti-influenza immune plasma, and vitamin C, but none is recommended at present in severe RVIs.
Evidence-based supportive care is the mainstay for management of severe respiratory viral infection. Non-invasive
ventilation in patients with severe RVI causing acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and pneumonia is associated with a
high likelihood of transition to invasive ventilation. Limited existing knowledge highlights the need for data regarding
supportive care and adjunctive pharmacologic therapy that is specific for critically ill patients with severe RVI. There is
a need for more pragmatic and efficient designs to test different therapeutics both individually and in combination.
Keywords: Acute respiratory distress syndrome, Influenza, Neuraminidase inhibitor, Antiviral therapy, Coronavirus,
Antiviral therapy
With the expanding use of molecular assays, viral pathogens are increasingly detected among critically ill adult
patients with respiratory illness; studies have reported a
prevalence between 17% and 53% of patients (Table 1),
depending on study design, sample type, duration of illness, and assay methods. Common viruses that can cause
severe respiratory viral infections (RVIs) include influenza A and B viruses, picornaviruses (rhinovirus, enterovirus [e.g., enterovirus D68]), human coronaviruses
(229E, NL63, OC43, HKU1), respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV), human metapneumovirus, parainfluenza virus,
and adenovirus (Tables 1 and 2). Novel pathogens including zoonotic coronaviruses like the agents causing Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019 nCoV) are still being identified (Table 2).
Establishing causation between viruses detected in
respiratory specimens and the clinical illness is sometimes difficult, because (1) detection of some agents
(e.g., picornaviruses) in the upper respiratory tract may
indicate asymptomatic or mild infection, (2) upper respiratory tract samples may be negative despite positive
lower respiratory tract ones, and (3) secondary bacterial and less often fungal infections are commonly
co-identified [1]. However, it is generally believed
that most respiratory viruses by themselves can cause
severe illness, especially so in the elderly, persons with
co-morbidities (particularly immunosuppression), and
occasionally in previously healthy persons, in addition
to predisposing to secondary infections [2].
The objective of this narrative review is to outline current knowledge on the management of adults
requiring ICU admission for community-acquired
severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) due to RVIs.
This review focuses on viral pathogens transmitted via
the respiratory route. Respiratory infections with other
viral pathogens, such as cytomegalovirus and herpes
simplex viruses, are not discussed in this review.

Antiviral therapy
Generally available antiviral agents for different RVIs
are summarized in Table 3 [3]. Very few randomizedcontrolled trials have been completed in patients hospitalized for severe RVIs; recently completed trials of
nitazoxanide in SARI patients and of the RSV inhibitor
presatovir in adult RSV patients yielded negative results
[4, 5]. Antiviral therapeutics for influenza have been studied most extensively and are discussed briefly below. A
number of other antiviral agents for influenza, RSV, and
other RVIs are advancing in clinical study [6]. Controlled
studies of lopinavir/ritonavir combined with interferonbeta in hospitlized MERS patients (NCT02845843) and
of lopinavir/ritonavir and interferon-alpha 2b in hospitalized 2019-nCoV patients (ChiCTR2000029308) are currently in progess.
Neuraminidase inhibitors

Among the neuraminidase inhibitors (NAIs), oral
oseltamivir is the most widely available agent. In an individual participant data meta-analysis of hospitalized
patients with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection
(n = 29 234 patients from 78 studies), NAI treatment
(almost exclusively oseltamivir) was associated with a
reduction in mortality compared with no treatment,
including in the subgroup of ICU patients. Early treatment (within 2 days of symptom onset) was associated
with a reduction in mortality compared with later treatment [7]. Observational data also indicate reduction in
influenza A(H5N1)-associated mortality with timely
oseltamivir treatment before the onset of respiratory
failure [8]. The importance of timing of oseltamivir treatment has been demonstrated in an observational study of

Take‑home message
Evidence-based supportive care is the mainstay for management of
severe respiratory viral infection.
Early treatment with neuraminidase inhibitors is associated with
reduced mortality in severe influenza.
There is a need for pragmatic and efficient trial designs, to test a
variety of investigational therapeutics, individually and in combination.

1950 patients admitted to ICUs with influenza A(H1N1)
pdm09, which showed a trend toward improved survival
for those treated earliest [9]. Nevertheless, the Clinical
Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of
America (IDSA) recommends oseltamivir for all hospitalized patients with influenza, regardless of illness duration
prior to hospitalization [10].
In observational studies of critically ill patients
with influenza, higher compared to standard doses of
oseltamivir did not demonstrate benefit [11–13]. An
RCT of standard versus double-dose oseltamivir in hospitalized children and adults found no advantage with
respect to virologic and clinical endpoints [14]. Additionally, a study demonstrated accumulation of oseltamivir in
patients on both extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
and continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration leading to
4-to 5-fold increase in plasma levels [15]. The IDSA recommends against the routine use of higher doses of US
Food and Drug Administration-approved NAI drugs for
the treatment of seasonal influenza [10].
Duration of treatment is traditionally 5 days, but treatment duration is often extended to 10 days for severely
ill patients with ARDS or pneumonia or those who are
immunocompromised [10]. This approach is supported
by data showing slow influenza viral clearance from
the lower respiratory tract in critically ill patients with
influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 [16]. Of concern is the recent
observation of emergence of oseltamivir resistance in
23% of 22 critically ill A(H1N1)pdm09 patients, and its
association with persistent virus detection and much
higher mortality [17].
Nebulized zanamivir solution has been administered
to mechanically ventilated patients on compassionate
use basis, but the commercial formulation contains lactose and should not be used for nebulization, because its
use has been associated with blockage of the ventilator
circuit.
Peramivir is the only intravenous influenza antiviral agent currently approved by the US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA). Intravenous zanamivir
has been recently approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) (Table 3). These agents appear to
have comparable activity to oseltamivir in hospitalized
