Japanese Journal of Radiology

CT image of novel coronavirus pneumonia: a case report
Xiangmin Zhang1,2 · Wei Song1,2 · Xingli Liu1,2 · Liang Lyu1,2
Received: 14 February 2020 / Accepted: 2 March 2020

Objective Knowledge of CT characteristics of COVID-19 pneumonia might be helpful to the early diagnosis and treatment
of patients, and to control the spread of infection.
Methods The chest CT images of the patient were collected to describe the CT manifestations and characteristics, and they
were compared with the previous studies.
Results Multiple patchy ground-glass opacities (GGOs) were seen in bilateral lung, mostly in subpleural areas. They progressed within 3 days, and nodular GGOs were also seen together with subpleural patchy GGOs.
Conclusion Our case of COVID-19 pneumonia showed multiple subpleural GGOs in bilateral lung, rapid progression, and
it also accompanied nodular GGOs on chest CT. These findings were consistent with the previous reports, and they might
be useful for early detection and evaluation of severity of COVID-19 pneumonia.
Keywords COVID-19 pneumonia · Ground-glass opacities · CT

Department of Radiology, The First People’s Hospital
of Yunnan Province, No. 157 Jinbi Road, Kunming 650032,
Yunnan, China


COVID-19 pneumonia is infected by seventh known
coronaviruses, named 2019-nCoV. 2019-ncov is a kind of
virus which has homologous recombination between bat
coronavirus and unknown source coronavirus. Its recombination takes place in spike protein S, which can recognize
cell surface receptors, and get into cells to proliferation
by membrane fusion [3]. Fever is the main clinical symptom of COVID-19 pneumonia patients, followed by dry
cough, muscle ache or fatigue. Besides these, headache,
and hemoptysis and diarrhea may occur in some cases.
The incubation is required in some patients, and it takes
about 7–10 days, and the severe patients can progress to
ARDS [4]. The clinical symptoms of COVID-19 pneumonia are the same as the common upper respiratory tract
infection, but the chest CT has certain specificity [1, 2]. As
medical evidence, CT diagnosis was written in “Diagnosis and Treatment of Pneumonia Infected by 2019-nCoV
(trial implementation 5th Edition)” published by National
Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China [5].
However, it is difficult to distinguish COVID-19 pneumonia from other viral pneumonia on CT findings alone. It
is still necessary to clear and definite the epidemiological history, and it should be diagnosed by real-time RTPCR. There is no specific drug for the treatment of NCP
patients. Based on past experience in the treatment of
SARS and MERS, some antiviral drugs such as Lopinavir

Japanese Journal of Radiology
Fig. 1  a Chest CT on admission
shows multiple ground-glass
opacities in bilateral lungs,
mainly in the subpleural areas.
b: CT image of 3 days later
shows marked progression of
multiple ground-glass opacities in subpleural areas. c, d
High resolution CT images at
the same period of a and b,
respectively. They show nodular
ground-glass opacities in the
subpleural areas in upper lobe
of left lung, and they significantly progressed within 3 days

and Ritonavir may play a positive effect in the treatment of
NCP patients, while the curative effect still needs further
research [6].
In conclusion, our case of COVID-19 pneumonia showed
multiple subpleural GGOs in bilateral lung, rapid progression, and it also accompanied nodular GGOs on chest CT.
These findings were consistent with the previous reports,
and they might be useful for early detection and evaluation
of severity of COVID-19 pneumonia.
