J Pharm Pharm Sci (www.cspsCanada.org) 23, 58 - 64, 2020

Current Drugs with Potential for Treatment of COVID-19: A Literature Review

SARS-CoV-2 first emerged in China in December 2019 and rapidly spread worldwide.
No vaccine or approved drug is available to eradicate the virus, however, some drugs that are indicated for other
afflictions seems to be potentially beneficial to treat the infection albeit without unequivocal evidence. The aim
of this article is to review the published background on the effectiveness of these drugs against COVID-19
Methods: A thorough literature search was conducted on recently published studies which have published
between January 1 to March 25, 2020. PubMed, Google Scholar and Science Direct databases were searched
Results: A total 22 articles were found eligible. 8 discuss about treatment outcomes from their applied drugs
during treatment of COVID-19 patients, 4 report laboratory tests, one report animal trial and other 9 articles
discuss recommendations and suggestions based on the treatment process and clinical outcomes of other diseases
such as malaria, ebola, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
The data and/or recommendations are categorized in 4 classes: (a) anti-viral and anti-inflammatory drugs, (b)
anti-malaria drugs, (c) traditional Chinese drugs and (d) other treatments/drugs. Conclusion: All examined
treatments, although potentiality effective against COVID-19, need either appropriate drug development or
clinical trial to be suitable for clinical use.

The world has experienced various dangerous
outbreaks of various intensities such as ebola,
cholera, Spanish flu, American seasonal flu. Now
we are facing an arguably a more dangerous viral
endemic with COVID-19. This severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2),
formerly known as the 2019 novel Coronavirus
(2019nCoV or COVID-19), is a single-stranded
RNA beta-coronavirus whose genome encodes are
structural proteins, non-structural proteins and
accessory proteins (1). It has globally already
infected 413467 people and killed 18,433 people by
25 March, 2020 (2) and the casualties are growing
exponentially. In the meantime, only 113453
patients have recovered which is 27.45% of total
affected population (2). The characteristics of the
infected population is already published (3, 4).
Various treatments have been suggested and applied
to control COVIDE-19 based on previous
experiences with other viral infections such as
malaria, ebola and cholera (6). In addition, a
systematic review of the effect of chloroquine on
COVID-19 infection has appeared (5). However,
these treatments have resulted in controversy as are
not based on data generated from direct conventional

clinical trials albeit, a list of ongoing registered
clinical trials have been reported by Zhang et al (7).
Herein, a thorough literature review on these
treatments are presented.
