Delicate structural coordination of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus Nsp13 upon ATP
hydrolysis
Zhihui Jia 1,† , Liming Yan1,† , Zhilin Ren2 , Lijie Wu3 , Jin Wang4 , Jing Guo5 , Litao Zheng1 ,
Zhenhua Ming6 , Lianqi Zhang1 , Zhiyong Lou1 and Zihe Rao1,2,3,*

To date, an effective therapeutic treatment that confers strong attenuation toward coronaviruses (CoVs)
remains elusive. Of all the potential drug targets,
the helicase of CoVs is considered to be one of
the most important. Here, we first present the structure of the full-length Nsp13 helicase of SARS-CoV
(SARS-Nsp13) and investigate the structural coordination of its five domains and how these contribute to its translocation and unwinding activity.
A translocation model is proposed for the Upf1like helicase members according to three different structural conditions in solution characterized
through H/D exchange assay, including substrate
state (SARS-Nsp13-dsDNA bound with AMPPNP),
transition state (bound with ADP-AlF4 − ) and product
state (bound with ADP). We observed that the ␤19–
␤20 loop on the 1A domain is involved in unwinding
process directly. Furthermore, we have shown that
the RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), SARSNsp12, can enhance the helicase activity of SARSNsp13 through interacting with it directly. The interacting regions were identified and can be considered
common across CoVs, which provides new insights
into the Replication and Transcription Complex (RTC)
of CoVs.

The emergence of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in 2003 was the first opportunity
to allow investigation of a coronavirus (CoV) that was a
severe human pathogen. A decade later, a similar coronavirus termed Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) emerged, but alarmingly this virus has
higher case-fatality rates than SARS-CoV. Thus, there is a
refocussing of the world’s attention onto CoVs. The fact
that no therapeutic treatments are available for CoVs is a
serious concern (1,2). It is therefore necessary to study the
life cycle of CoVs to develop new ideas for effective vaccines
or drugs.
SARS-CoV belonging to the genus Betacoronavirus in
the family Coronaviridae has one of the largest known
RNA genomes (∼29.7 kb) among RNA viruses. Two large
polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab are encoded by this genome.
After being proteolytically processed, 16 non-structural
proteins (Nsps) are produced including primase (Nsp8),
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (Nsp12) and helicase
(Nsp13). These three enzymes and other Nsps are components of a replication and transcription complex (RTC)
which is essential for the life cycle of SARS-CoV (3,4).
Helicase SARS-CoV Nsp13 (SARS-Nsp13) plays a vital
role in catalyzing the unwinding of duplex oligonucleotides
into single strands in an NTP-dependent manner. Importantly, SARS-Nsp13 has been identified as an ideal target
for the development of anti-viral drugs due to its sequence
conservation and indispensability across all CoV species (5–
7). SARS-Nsp13 has been characterized as belonging to superfamily 1 (SF1) of the six helicase superfamilies which are
