Eco-Virological Preliminary Study of Potentially
Emerging Pathogens in Hedgehogs
(Erinaceus europaeus) Recovered at a Wildlife
Treatment and Rehabilitation Center in Northern Italy
Mauro Delogu 1 , Claudia Cotti 1 , Davide Lelli 2 , Enrica Sozzi 2 , Tiziana Trogu 2 ,
Antonio Lavazza 2 , Giacomo Garuti 1 , Maria Rita Castrucci 3 , Gabriele Vaccari 4 ,
Maria Alessandra De Marco 5, *,† and Ana Moreno 2,†

Most of the newly emerging infections arise from animal reservoirs, frequently
represented by wildlife species. Western European hedgehogs (Erinaceus europaeus) are mammalian
hibernators, mainly nocturnal and insectivorous, living in natural open and green spaces as well as
artificial, rural and urban, areas. They are generalist predators of macro-invertebrates, but they may
also eat meat, bird eggs and on occasion pet food. These ecological and feeding habits, along with their
high population densities, notable synanthropic attitudes, frequent contacts with sympatric wild and
domestic species, including humans, implicate the possibility of intra- and interspecies interactions
accounting for the possible involvement of E. europaeus in the ecology of several potentially emerging
pathogens, including coronaviruses. Using PCR-based and virus isolation methods, we found that
58.3% of 24 hedgehogs’ fecal samples were PCR-positive for Erinaceus coronaviruses (EriCoVs).
We did not observe any clinical disease related to the EriCoV infection in hedgehogs. However,
the high mutation rates characterizing members of the Coronaviridae family and their potential
successful interspecies host jumps—as that likely occurred in the Novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
emergence—should be considered in the management of hedgehogs admitted to multi-species wildlife
rehabilitation centers, recommending their return back to the original recovery areas.
Abstract: The Western European Hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) is one of the four hedgehog species
belonging to the genus Erinaceus. Among them, E. amurensis is extant in East Asia’s areas only,
whereas E. europaeus, E. roumanicus and E. concolor are mainly found in Europe. E. europaeus is
endemically distributed from western to central and southern Europe, including Italy. Western
European hedgehogs’ ecological and feeding habits, along with their high population densities, notable
synanthropic attitudes, frequent contacts with sympatric wild and domestic species, including humans,
implicate the possible involvement of E. europaeus in the ecology of potentially emerging viruses,

such as coronaviruses, influenza A and influenza D viruses, canine distemper virus, pestiviruses and
Aujeszky’s disease virus. We examined 24 E. europaeus individuals found injured in urban and rural
areas of Northern Italy. Of the 24 fecal samples collected and tested for the above-mentioned pathogens
by both PCR-based and virus isolation methods, 14 were found PCR-positive for betacoronaviruses
belonging to lineage C and related to the known Erinaceus coronaviruses (EriCoVs), as determined by
partial sequencing of the virus genome. Our findings suggest that hedgehogs could be considered
natural reservoirs of CoVs, and also act as chronic shedding carriers of these potentially emerging
RNA viruses.
Keywords: wild animals; hedgehogs; public health; coronaviruses; Erinaceus coronavirus (EriCoV);
Betacoronavirus infection

Western European Hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) is one of the four hedgehog species belonging
to the genus Erinaceus, biologically classified in the order Eulipotyphla [1]. Among them, E. amurensis is
extant in East Asia’s areas only, whereas E. europaeus, E. roumanicus and E. concolor are mainly found
in Europe. In particular, E. europaeus—from here on also simply called hedgehog—is a terrestrial
mammal endemically distributed from western to central and southern Europe; this species is also
present in parts of Fennoscandia, in north-western European Russia, the British Isles, Azores and
several Mediterranean islands [2]. E. europaeus, protected by the Italian law 157/92 [3], is abundantly
distributed throughout the Italian peninsula, in Sicily, in Sardinia and in some smaller islands, without
any reported evidence of a rapid decline [4].
Hedgehogs are mammalian hibernators, with different plesiomorphic features in their morphology,
physiology and behavior. They are mainly nocturnal and insectivorous, build nests and use hearing and
smell as a dominant sense, and possess peculiar specializations such as spines and highly developed
back muscles allowing them to roll up [5]. Hedgehogs’ suitable habitats include natural open and
green spaces as well as artificial, rural and urban, areas with marked preference for lowlands and
hilly areas providing abundant food supply and plenty of grass, trees and fallen leaves. They also
need diversity of habitats as those found in edges of deciduous woodlands or in man-made ecotonal
interfaces (i.e., parks and garden with hedges) [6]. Despite its solitary lifestyle [7], E. europaeus has
a highly variable home range, ranging in Italy from 5.5 to 102.5 ha [8]. As generalist predators of
macro-invertebrates, hedgehogs consume most frequently caterpillars, earthworms, earwigs, slugs,
millipedes and beetles (including coprophagous species); they may also eat meat (e.g., in the form
of carrion or preyed small vertebrates such as mice, snakes and birds), bird eggs and pet food that is
frequently found in gardens and shared with dogs and cats.
The above-mentioned ecological and feeding habits, along with their high population densities,
notable synanthropic attitudes and frequent contacts with sympatric wild and domestic species,
including humans [5], implicate intra- and interspecies interactions [9] accounting for the potential
involvement of E. europaeus (e.g., as a maintenance host, bridge host or dead-end host) in the ecology
of several potentially emerging pathogens, as those reported below.
Coronaviruses (CoVs) can infect productively a wide range of animal species and cause respiratory,
enteric and neurological diseases of variable severity. As shown during the last two decades, potentially
zoonotic CoVs can pose massive public health threats such as those related to the Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) [10], Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
(MERS-CoV) [11] and 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) [12] emergences. Two of the four
recognized genera of CoVs (i.e., Alphacoronavirus and Betacoronavirus) are probably perpetuated
in bat populations [13,14], recently recognized as the evolutionary origins of the MERS-CoV, emerged
in 2012 in humans [15]. The recent detection of MERS-related CoVs in hedgehogs from Germany [16],


France [17] and Great Britain [18] suggests that E. europaeus, which is belonging to a Chiroptera-related
order [19], represents a wild reservoir of betacoronaviruses known as Erinaceus CoVs (EriCoVs).
The wild bird Influenza A virus (IAV) gene pool poses significant risks for both animal and human
health because of its ability to colonize a wide variety of animal species (included in the Mammalia,
Aves and Reptilia classes) in which IAV can cause variable outcomes of infection, with possible high
morbidity and fatality rates [20]. The newly identified Influenza D virus (IDV), also circulating in Italian
livestock [21], is known to infect cattle, which are the main reservoir of the virus, and small ruminants,
swine, horses, camels, ferrets and humans. Both IAV and IDV exhibit respiratory and fecal shedding
and the broad IAV host range includes wild and pet species sympatric or potentially sympatric with E.
europaeus (e.g., dogs, cats, ferrets, land-based birds) [22].
Canine morbillivirus (canine distemper virus, CDV) causes a highly contagious and systemic
disease often involving the respiratory, gastro-intestinal and nervous systems of canids and poses
worldwide a relevant health risk for domestic and wild species of carnivores [23–25]. Its wide range of
naturally infected hosts includes Rodentia, Primates, Artiodactyla, Proboscidea and Eulipotyphla species,
and a morbillivirus antigenically related to CDV was also isolated in fecal samples obtained from a
sick E. europaeus [26].
Pestiviruses include eleven known Pestivirus species along with related unclassified emerging
viruses that can infect domestic and wild ruminants, pigs and wild boars [27], rats and bats. Pestiviruses
can cause a wide variety of symptoms ranging from mild to severe disease and even death. Transmission
of pestivirus infection can occur through nasal secretion, urine, feces, contact with fomites and by
vertical routes [28]. To the best of our knowledge, no pestivirus infection has been ever reported
in hedgehogs.
Suid alphaherpesvirus 1 (SHV-1) is the etiological agent of the Aujeszky’s disease and may infect
a very broad range of domestic and wild mammalian species, including hedgehogs [29], but not
humans and tailless apes. SHV-1 replicates in the central nervous system and other organs, such as
the respiratory tract, and only pigs and wild boars can survive productive infections, thus playing
the role of a natural reservoir in which the virus can persist latently after clinical recovery [30].
Occasional consumption of wild boar carrions could expose hedgehogs to SHV-1 infection, which is
quite frequently detected in populations of this wild suid species in Italy [31].
The aim of this study is to investigate the presence of the above-mentioned viral pathogens in
fecal samples of hedgehogs to better clarify the role of E. europaeus in the ecology of such viruses.
This research could also provide epidemiological information useful for the health management of
hedgehogs admitted to wildlife rescue centers, where different animal species, including humans,
can interact.
