pharmaceuticals
Commentary

Emetine, Ipecac, Ipecac Alkaloids and Analogues as
Potential Antiviral Agents for Coronaviruses
Martin D. Bleasel and Gregory M. Peterson *
School of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Tasmania, Hobart Tasmania 7001, Australia;
martin.bleasel@gmail.com


The COVID-19 coronavirus is currently spreading around the globe with limited treatment
options available. This article presents the rationale for potentially using old drugs (emetine,
other ipecac alkaloids or analogues) that have been used to treat amoebiasis in the treatment of
COVID-19. Emetine had amongst the lowest reported half-maximal effective concentration (EC50 )
from over 290 agents screened for the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) and severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronaviruses. While EC50 concentrations of emetine are achievable
in the blood, studies show that concentrations of emetine can be almost 300 times higher in the
lungs. Furthermore, based on the relative EC50 s of emetine towards the coronaviruses compared
with Entamoeba histolytica, emetine could be much more effective as an anti-coronavirus agent than
it is against amoebiasis. This paper also discusses the known side effects of emetine and related
compounds, how those side effects can be managed, and the optimal method of administration for
the potential treatment of COVID-19. Given the serious and immediate threat that the COVID-19
coronavirus poses, our long history with emetine and the likely ability of emetine to reach therapeutic
concentrations within the lungs, ipecac, emetine, and other analogues should be considered as
potential treatment options, especially if in vitro studies confirm viral sensitivity.
Keywords: COVID-19; coronavirus; emetine; ipecac; dehydroemetine; MERS; SARS; treatment;
repurposing: antiviral

Emetine is one of the main alkaloids found in ipecacuanha (ipecac) root [1]. Ipecac syrup has
predominantly been used to induce vomiting in the management of poisoning. Emetine, and perhaps
ipecac, ipecac alkaloids and their analogues, should be considered as potentially potent and effective
therapeutic agents against the coronavirus family of viruses and, in particular, the COVID-19
coronavirus. As an antiviral, emetine has been shown to have amongst the lowest EC50 value
(half-maximal effective concentration) from over 294 agents screened, with an EC50 of 0.054 and
0.014 µM for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and the Middle East respiratory syndrome
(MERS) coronaviruses, respectively [2,3]. Outlined here is the rationale for the potential use of emetine
or similar compounds in the treatment of coronavirus infections and, if confirmed from in vitro
sensitivity analyses, COVID-19.
Emetine, as an isolated alkaloid, was used as an anti-infective agent from 1912 when Vedder [4]
showed that the drug killed amoebae in vitro. It was one of the most widely used agents,
orally or intramuscularly, in the treatment of both intestinal and extraintestinal amoebiasis [5–8]
until metronidazole became available [5]. Emetine is structurally unrelated to metronidazole.
In a study looking at the amount of emetine absorbed after a 30 mL oral dose of ipecac (containing
13.9 mg of emetine) in 10 subjects, the mean plasma concentration between 1 and 3 h post-dosing was
approximately 6.5 ng/mL (0.0135 µM), which equates to only 0.25 to ~1 times the EC50 for SARS and
MERS coronaviruses, with all patients vomiting at the 30 mL dose [9]. While the emetic effects of ipecac
syrup (30 mL) can be completely eliminated and nausea significantly reduced by the use of 5-HT3
antagonists, such as ondansetron [10], which may enable higher blood levels to be achieved, these results
might initially appear uninspiring. However, as coronaviruses are predominantly respiratory tract
infections, the amount of emetine in the lungs is more important than in the plasma. Oral bioavailability
studies of ipecac alkaloids in rats have shown that the concentration of radiolabeled emetine is many
times higher in the tissues than in plasma. In relation to the lungs, after 8 and 24 h, the concentration
of emetine in the lungs is ~173 and ~294 times higher than in plasma, respectively, with the maximum
recorded amount present in the lungs at the 24-h time period. High concentrations were also found in
many other tissues, such as the liver, heart, and small and large intestines [11]. Similarly, studies in
humans have strongly indicated that emetine quickly undergoes extensive distribution to the tissues [9],
with slow excretion and detectable concentrations that may persist in the urine for 40–60 days after
treatment has been ceased [12].
It may therefore be possible that the lung concentrations of emetine after the oral administration
of ipecac syrup are sufficient for anti-coronavirus activity, especially if other ipecac alkaloids in the
syrup also have antiviral properties and it is taken with a 5-HT3 antagonist to avoid vomiting. As an
example, cephaeline (another principal alkaloid of ipecac) has been shown to have low nanomolar IC50
(half-maximal inhibitory concentration) values of less than 0.042 µM against the Zika virus [13].
Unfortunately, emetine absorption from oral ipecac displays considerable inter-patient
variation [14]. Some patients may not absorb sufficient emetine or alkaloids to be therapeutically
effective. Intramuscular administration of emetine has a number of advantages over oral dosing.
Emetine undergoes metabolism by the liver [15]. Intramuscular administration would prevent any liver
metabolism during oral absorption (the “first-pass effect”). Radiolabeled emetine given parenterally,
as with oral administration, accumulates in the lung [16]. In fact, another advantage of intramuscular
over oral administration could be its greater uptake by the lungs. With radiolabeled emetine given
by the oral route in rats, there was, at most time points, significantly (0.8–5.8 times) more emetine
found in the liver than there was in the lungs [11]. Conversely, with radiolabeled emetine given by the
intraperitoneal route in guinea pigs, the situation was reversed; at each time point, there was over
twice as much emetine in the lungs than the liver [16]. It could initially be argued that this reflects
interspecies variation. The more likely explanation is that with drugs absorbed into the intestinal
circulation following oral administration, the first organ the circulation goes to is the liver, in order that
foreign compounds can be detoxified. This results in a higher initial deposition in the liver, with the
proportion in the liver decreasing throughout the day as it redistributes into the systemic circulation.
With parenteral administration, once a drug enters the circulatory system, the first organ after leaving
the heart is the lungs, resulting in higher concentrations to potentially counteract the COVID-19 virus.
Intramuscular administration of emetine can also result in nausea and vomiting [12] which,
based on studies with ipecac syrup [10], are likely to be negated with the concomitant use of a 5-HT3
antagonist. It is unlikely that the two agents would be antagonistic to each other with regard to
anti-viral activity, especially as emetine has a high affinity for the 5-HT4 receptor with little activity on
5-HT3 [17]. However, it should at least be considered that they could interact until in vitro studies can
confirm otherwise.
