Adhikari et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty

Epidemiology, causes, clinical manifestation
and diagnosis, prevention and control of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) during the
early outbreak period: a scoping review
Sasmita Poudel Adhikari1, Sha Meng1, Yu-Ju Wu1, Yu-Ping Mao2, Rui-Xue Ye1, Qing-Zhi Wang1, Chang Sun1,
Sean Sylvia3, Scott Rozelle4, Hein Raat5 and Huan Zhou1*

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has been identified as the cause of an outbreak of respiratory
illness in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China beginning in December 2019. As of 31 January 2020, this epidemic had
spread to 19 countries with 11 791 confirmed cases, including 213 deaths. The World Health Organization has
declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
Methods: A scoping review was conducted following the methodological framework suggested by Arksey and
O’Malley. In this scoping review, 65 research articles published before 31 January 2020 were analyzed and discussed
to better understand the epidemiology, causes, clinical diagnosis, prevention and control of this virus. The research
domains, dates of publication, journal language, authors’ affiliations, and methodological characteristics were
included in the analysis. All the findings and statements in this review regarding the outbreak are based on
published information as listed in the references.

The coronavirus belongs to a family of viruses that may
cause various symptoms such as pneumonia, fever,
breathing difficulty, and lung infection [1]. These viruses
are common in animals worldwide, but very few cases
have been known to affect humans. The World Health
Organization (WHO) used the term 2019 novel coronavirus to refer to a coronavirus that affected the lower respiratory tract of patients with pneumonia in Wuhan,
China on 29 December 2019 [2–4]. The WHO announced that the official name of the 2019 novel coronavirus is coronavirus disease (COVID-19) [4]. And the
current reference name for the virus is severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). It was
reported that a cluster of patients with pneumonia of
unknown cause was linked to a local Huanan South
China Seafood Market in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China
in December 2019 [5].
In response to the outbreak, the Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC) dispatched
a rapid response team to accompany health authorities
of Hubei province and Wuhan city to conduct epidemiological and etiological investigations. The WHO confirmed that the outbreak of the coronavirus epidemic
was associated with the Huanan South China Seafood
Marketplace, but no specific animal association was
identified [6]. Scientists immediately started to research
the source of the new coronavirus, and the first genome
of COVID-19 was published by the research team led by
Prof. Yong-Zhen Zhang, on 10 January 2020 [7]. Within
1 month, this virus spread quickly throughout China
during the Chinese New Year – a period when there is a
high level of human mobility among Chinese people. Although it is still too early to predict susceptible populations, early patterns have shown a trend similar to
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle
East respiratory syndrome (MERS) coronaviruses. Susceptibility seems to be associated with age, biological
sex, and other health conditions [8]. COVID-19 has now
been declared as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the WHO [9].
Given the spread of the new coronavirus and its impacts
on human health, the research community has responded
rapidly to the new virus and many preliminary research
articles have already been published about this epidemic
(Additional file 1). We conducted a scoping review to
summarize and critically analyze all the published scientific articles regarding the new coronavirus in January
2020. This review aims to provide the evidence of early
findings on the epidemiology, causes, clinical diagnosis, as
well as prevention and control of COVID-19 in relation to
time, location, and source of publication. This review can
provide meaningful information for future research related
to this topic and may support government decisionmaking on strategies to handle this public health emergency at the community, national, and international levels.
