Abdirizak et al. Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling

Evaluating the potential impact of targeted
vaccination strategies against severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARSCoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV) outbreaks in the
healthcare setting
Fatima Abdirizak*, Rayleen Lewis and Gerardo Chowell

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) are two
coronaviruses with demonstrated potential to generate significant nosocomial outbreaks. In particular, MERS continues
to pose a significant threat in the Middle East since 2012. Currently, no licensed vaccine or drug treatment is available
to treat patients infected with either coronavirus. However, there are some MERS vaccines in the preclinical stage
of development. We sought to evaluate the potential impact of targeted vaccination strategies for mitigating SARS and
MERS outbreaks in healthcare settings using simple mathematical models and detailed historic transmission trees
describing the progression of past nosocomial outbreaks of SARS and MERS.
Results: Our findings suggest that vaccination strategies targeting patients and healthcare workers, which have
been disproportionately affected during past outbreaks, and assuming two vaccination coverage levels at 50 and
75% have the potential to avert nearly 50% or more of MERS or SARS cases.
Conclusion: Our modeling results informed by historic outbreak data for SARS and MERS suggest that vaccination
strategies targeting patients could be an effective measure to mitigate and prevent outbreaks in the healthcare setting.
Keywords: MERS, SARS, Coronavirus, Nosocomial, Hospital transmission, Vaccine, Vaccination strategy, South Korea, Middle
East, Stochastic simulation, And infection control and prevention

The 2003 outbreaks of Severe Acute Respiratory syndrome
(SARS) were reported in 26 countries with a total of 8098
cases after 6 months [1, 2]. Although many countries
reported cases of SARS, the disease was often limited to a
few travel-related cases without any further subsequent
spread [3]. However, five areas- Canada, China, Hong
Kong, Singapore, and Vietnam- experienced substantial
SARS outbreaks [3]. Sporadic importation of MERS, a related coronavirus, outside of the Middle East has primarily
* Correspondence: fabdirizak@gmail.com
Department of Population Health Sciences, School of Public Health, Georgia
State University, P.O. Box 3984, Atlanta, GA 30302-3984, USA
been due to returning travelers from the Middle East [4, 5].
Sustained MERS transmission outside of the Middle East
was atypical until the South Korea outbreak, which became
the largest MERS outbreak outside of the Middle East [5,
6]. The index patient in the South Korea outbreak developed MERS associated symptoms after returning from the
Middle East [7]. After being discharged from the initial
clinic he visited, he subsequently visited an emergency
department in another hospital on the same day [7]. In the
span of ten days, the index patient was seen in three hospitals [8]. By the end of the South Korea outbreak, there were
186 MERS cases involving 17 hospitals generated from a
single transmission chain stemming from the index
patient [8, 9].
Furthermore, Saudi Arabia has reported approximately
82% of MERS-CoV cases worldwide [5, 10]. The first
MERS-CoV case was first identified in Saudi Arabia and
has generated recurrent nosocomial outbreaks in the
Middle East and one substantial outbreak in the Republic of Korea in 2015 [5]. Outbreaks in healthcare settings
have been associated with overcrowding conditions,
movement of undetected cases through the facility, and
insufficient implementation of infection prevention and
control measures [4, 5]. Additionally, the practice of
seeking care at multiple health facilities, commonly referred to as “ hospital shopping”, is suspected to have
contributed to the spread of MERS across varies hospitals in South Korea [7, 8]. The transmission dynamics of
MERS-CoV outbreaks resemble those of the 2003-2014
SARS-CoV-a outbreaks in several areas of the world [11].
The modes of transmission and risk factors for MERS infection remain unclear. However, exposure to infectious
camel or camel products appears to play an important role
in triggering outbreaks [5, 12]. Thus, given the recurrent
nature of MERS-CoV outbreaks in Saudi Arabia and the
risk posed to other countries, it is important to understand the role of specific control interventions particularly
in the healthcare setting [13–17].
Preventing and limiting the size of future outbreaks,
especially of MERS-CoV, remains a priority for public
health, and use of a vaccine in high-risk populations could
be key to reduce associated mortality. Although SARS
outbreaks have not been reported for 13 years, modeling
SARS transmission and control in the healthcare setting
could help devise control strategies for controlling MERS
outbreaks, which are still occurring to date [5, 18]. SARS
and MERS share some commonalities. Both diseases are
notably seen to be amplified in healthcare settings and
show to have some degree of transmission heterogeneity
where superspreaders are a hallmark [11]. Currently, there
are no reliable antiviral drugs or vaccines available for
either coronaviruses, thus rapid diagnosis has been fundamental in managing outbreaks [19]. However, the lack of
an appropriate animal model that mimics that natural
history of the disease has slowed down the development
of effective pharmaceutical interventions against MERSCoV [20].
Once a MERS-CoV vaccine becomes available, it will
be important to implement effective vaccination strategies, such as targeting those groups that generate the
most MERS and SARS cases [21]. In this paper, we aim
to model the potential impact of targeted vaccination
strategies against hospital-based MERS and SARS transmission by using stochastic simulations and detailed
transmission trees that describe the course of past MERS
and SARS outbreaks in healthcare settings.