Current Medical Science
Current
Medical Science 40(2):2020
DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11596-020-2174-4

40(2):1-5,2020

1

Experience of Clinical Management for Pregnant Women and Newborns
with Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia in Tongji Hospital, China
Shao-shuai WANG1†, Xuan ZHOU1†, Xing-guang LIN1, Yan-yan LIU1, Jian-li WU1, Lali Mwamaka Sharifu1, Xiao-lin HU2,
Zhi-hui RONG2, Wei LIU2, Xiao-ping LUO2, Zhuo CHEN3, Wan-jiang ZENG1, Su-hua CHEN1, Ding MA1, Ling CHEN2#, Ling
FENG1#
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, China
2
Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030 China
3
Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, China
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2020

Summary: Based on the New Diagnosis and Treatment Scheme for Novel Coronavirus Infected
Pneumonia (Trial Edition 5), combined with our current clinical treatment experience, we recently
proposed a revision of the first edition of “Guidance for maternal and fetal management during
pneumonia epidemics of novel coronavirus infection in the Wuhan Tongji Hospital”. This article
focused on the issues of greatest concern of pregnant women including severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection diagnostic criteria, inspection precautions,
drug treatment options, indications and methods of termination of pregnancy, postpartum fever,
breastfeeding considerations, mode of mother-to-child transmission, neonatal isolation and advice
on neonatal nursing, to provide valuable experience for better management of SARS-CoV-2
infection in pregnant women and newborns.
Key words: COVID-19; pneumonia; pregnant women; newborn; disease management

1 INTRODUCTION
Since December 2019, Wuhan-Hubei province,
China has successively found several cases of patients
with novel coronavirus pneumonia (NCP). With
the spread of the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), such cases have been
found in other regions of China and abroad, and
some areas have found cases with no travel history
in Wuhan. This disease has been incorporated into
the Class B infectious diseases stipulated in the Law
of the People’s Republic of China on the Prevention
and Control of Infectious Diseases and measures for
the prevention and management of Class A infectious
diseases have been adopted.
On February 5, 2020, the National Health
Commission of the People’s Republic of China
issued the New Diagnosis and Treatment Scheme for
Novel Coronavirus Infected Pneumonia (Trial Edition
Shao-shuai WANG, E-mail: colombo2008@sina.com;
Xuan ZHOU, E-mail: zhouxuantjh@163.com
†
The authors contributed equally to this work.
#
Corresponding authors, Ling FENG, E-mail: fltj007@163.
com; Ling CHEN, E-mail: 790356760@qq.com.

5)[1] (hereinafter referred to as the “Fifth Edition of
Diagnosis and Treatment Scheme”), which pointed
out that asymptomatic patients could also spread the
virus. Most patients had fever, fatigue, dry cough as
the mainly manifested symptoms and a few patients
had nasal congestion, runny nose, diarrhea and other
symptoms, while several cases had no obvious fever.
The total number of leukocytes in peripheral blood in
the early stage of disease was normal or reduced, the
lymphocyte count was generally decreased, and chest
CT presented NCP’s imaging features[2].
Special attention should be paid to the different
requirements of Hubei Province and other provinces
in terms of the epidemic’s situation, the diagnostic
criteria of the disease, and the detection, reporting
and exclusion of cases. In addition to suspected and
confirmed cases, clinically diagnosed cases have been
added in Hubei Province. As long as the suspected cases
have NCP’s imaging features, they would be treated
as clinically diagnosed cases and handled according to
the severity of clinical classification. Once suspected
cases and clinically diagnosed cases are found in Hubei
Province, they would be immediately quarantined,
treated, and specimens taken for pathogenic testing as
soon as possible.

2
Pregnant women are in a state of special immune
tolerance and are susceptible to the virus. There has
been many confirmed cases of infection in pregnant
women in China. We have recently reported a case of
neonatal infection with throat swab virus positive at 36
h after birth[3]. Therefore, the diagnosis and treatment
plan for suspected or confirmed cases in pregnant
women must take into account the situation of both
mothers and babies. On January 28, we published
“Guidance for maternal and fetal management during
pneumonia epidemics of novel coronavirus infection
in the Wuhan Tongji Hospital (First edition)”[4]. Based
on the clinical characteristics, diagnosis and treatment
progress of the recently discovered diseases, we offered
an updated clinical management for pregnant women
and newborns with NCP.
2 MATERNAL MANAGEMENT
2.1 Diagnostic Criteria
According to the “Fifth Edition of Diagnosis and
Treatment Scheme”, the diagnostic criteria of Hubei
Province and other provinces are different. The cases
are still divided into suspected and confirmed cases in
provinces outside Hubei. The specific standards have
been presented in the “Fifth Edition of Diagnosis and
Treatment Scheme”. In Hubei Province, in addition to
suspected and confirmed cases, clinically diagnosed
cases have been added. As long as the suspected
case has imaging characteristics of NCP, it will be
judged as a clinically diagnosed case, and its clinical
classification and treatment principles are consistent
with those of the confirmed cases. It emphasizes the
importance of clinical diagnosis of imaging, which
is conducive to early isolation and early treatment.
Details are as follows:
(1) Suspected cases should satisfy any one or
none of the items of epidemiological history, and
simultaneously meet clinical manifestations at the
same time. Comprehensive analysis of the following
epidemiological history and clinical manifestations
should be applied.
Epidemiological history: ① Travel history or
residence history in Wuhan, or surrounding areas near
Wuhan, or other communities with case reports within
14 days before the onset of illness; ② Contact history
with patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 (positive
nucleic acid test) within 14 days before the onset of
illness; ③ Contact history with patients who had a fever
or patients with respiratory symptoms from Wuhan or
surrounding areas near Wuhan or from communities
with case reports within 14 days before the onset of
illness; ④ Clustering occurrence.
Clinical manifestations: ① Fever or respiratory
symptoms; ② Reduction in the total number of
leukocytes or normal in the early stage of diseases, or

Current Medical Science 40(2):2020

the lymphocyte count is reduced. Note that the blood
cells count may not have typical changes during the
early stages of the infection in pregnant women.
(2) Clinically diagnosed cases refer to suspected
cases that have imaging characteristics of NCP.
(3) Confirmed cases signify clinically diagnosed
or suspected cases with one of the following pathogenic
evidence: ① Real-time quantitative PCR of respiratory
specimens or blood specimens is positive for the
detection of SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acids; ②Viruses
in respiratory specimens or blood specimens for
genetically sequenced are highly homologous to
known SARS-CoV-2.
2.2 Institution and Procedure of Hospitalization
Suspected cases, particularly cases with fever
in pregnant women should be firstly pre-diagnosed,
temperature checked and directed by a clinician
to designated fever clinics. Almost all local health
commissions have successively set up designated
hospitals for patients with corona virus disease 2019
(COVID-19) including some designated hospitals
specialized in pregnant women.
Suspected or confirmed cases outside Hubei
Province should be quarantined immediately and on the
promise of ensuring the safety of transfer, they should
be transferred to the designated hospital that can treat
pregnant women as soon as possible. Suspected and
clinically diagnosed cases in Hubei Province must be
immediately quarantined and treated in a single room,
and confirmed cases can be treated in the same ward.
2.3 Criteria for Recovery
If the temperature reverts to normal for more than 3
days, the respiratory symptoms improves significantly,
the lung imaging shows obvious absorption of
inflammation, and the nucleic acid test for respiratory
pathogens shows negative for two consecutive times
(sampling interval at least 1 day), the patient could
discharge from the hospital or be transferred to the
appropriate department for treatment according to
other illnesses.
2.4 Inspection Precautions
Even if eight routine tests for respiratory virus
infection are positive, it still cannot exclude SARSCoV-2 infection. According to existing clinical cases,
patients with NCP may be infected with pathogens
such as influenza A virus, influenza B virus, and
mycoplasma at the same time. Therefore, for suspected
cases, clinically diagnosed cases and those with a
history of close contact, it is recommended that SARSCoV-2 pathogenic tests are performed in time even if
the eight routine tests for respiratory virus infection
are positive. Moreover, it was clinically found that
the positive rate of nucleic acid detection in patients
with NCP could not reach 100%. If the test result is
negative, the test is performed again if necessary.
Whether the radiological examination causes

Current Medical Science 40(2):2020

abnormal fetal development depends on the gestational
week at that time and the fetal radiation dose of the
radiological examination technique. Theoretically,
the fetal radiation dose of chest CT does not reach
the teratogenic threshold, so it is relatively safe. It
is recommended that pregnant women take a chest
CT examination after informed consent, and take
abdominal protection measures for the sake of safety.
2.5 Drug Treatment Options
The use of alpha-interferon in the early stage of
pregnancy has the risk of affecting fetal growth and
development, hence pregnant women should be fully
informed. Lopinavir/ritonavir have been listed as the
preferred drug regimen for HIV during pregnancy[5].
Based on animal studies and limited human reports,
the drug does not appear to increase the risk of adverse
pregnancy outcomes. Medical personnel should bring
in pregnant women and their families on the benefits
for pregnant women and the potential risks for the
fetus, and choose the medicine when the potential
benefits outweigh the potential risks to the fetus.
Obvious embryonic lethality and teratogenicity were
observed in ribavirin in animal experiments, thus, it
was contraindicated during pregnancy.
Suspected cases as well as mild and ordinary
cases in pregnant women could take traditional
Chinese medicines for a week. Patients with fatigue
and fever could take Jinye Baidu granules, 1 bag at a
time, 3 times a day or take Lianhua Qingwen capsule,
4 capsules at a time, 3 times a day. For those with
asthenia and gastrointestinal discomfort, Huoxiang
Zhengqi (concentrated honey pill or oral liquid) can be
selected, 8 capsules or 1 stick at a time, 3 times a day.
Patients with diarrhea can choose berberine 0.3 g once,
2–3 times a day. It is advocated to take a cure according
to the prescription of gynecologists of traditional
Chinese medicine. There is no safety data currently in
pregnant women taking the above mentioned traditional
Chinese medicines, but the antiviral efficacy has been
recognized. Pregnant women should be informed
to weigh the advantages and disadvantages before
choosing to use them. Because the pregnant women
infected with SARS-CoV-2 are not recommended to
breastfeed, taking traditional Chinese medicines might
be safe.
2.6 Antenatal Examination
During the epidemic, it is suggested that pregnant
women perform prenatal inspection and assessment
in accordance with the guidelines for health care
under the promise of personal protection during
pregnancy. It is necessary to pay close attention to fetal
movement changes during the third trimester. Those
with complications should increase the frequency of
the prenatal inspections. Suspected cases, clinically
diagnosed cases and confirmed cases in pregnant
women should undergo obstetric examinations at

3
designated hospitals set by the local health commission
that can treat pregnant women. Electronic fetal heart
rate monitoring and ultrasound examinations should
be used to assess the condition of the fetus based on
the gestation week. Other pregnant women are advised
to complete the obstetric examination at a medical
institution that does not have fever clinics. If it is
possible, it is recommended that medical institutions
that carry out maternal health care during the NCP
epidemic establish green channels for pregnant
women[6]. In order to reduce cross-infection, medical
institutions that have perinatal health care should
take advantage of the Internet Plus to fulfill online
consultation and guidance for pregnant women.
2.7 Indications and Methods of Terminating
Pregnancy
Before terminating pregnancy during the epidemic,
a comprehensive analysis of the severity of the disease,
the gestational week and the fetal condition should be
taken into account[7]. Indications for termination of
pregnancy include: (1) Obstetric indications: Judging
according to the specific situation and indications for
termination of pregnancy. (2) Severe and critical cases:
Continuing pregnancy may endanger the safety of the
mother and fetus. On the basis of informed consent,
pregnancy should be terminated.
Severe cases refer to respiratory distress
(respiratory rate ≥30 beats/min); or oxygen saturation
≤93% at rest; or arterial blood oxygen pressure (PaO2)/
oxygen concentration (FiO2) ≤300 mmHg. Critically
ill patients refer to cases with respiratory failure and
requirement for mechanical ventilation; or shock; or
complications of other organ failure requiring ICU
monitoring and treatment.
The principles of how to terminate pregnancy are
as follows:
(1) Indications for vaginal delivery: mild illness,
good cervical conditions, already in labor and no
contraindications to vaginal delivery.
(2) Indications for termination by surgery: severe
and critical cases.
The sites of termination of pregnancy for suspected
or confirmed cases are dedicated isolation rooms or
operating rooms for respiratory infectious diseases in
the fever ward. A multidisciplinary joint diagnosis and
treatment team should be set up, composed of medical
staff in various specialties such as obstetrics, neonatal,
infection, respiratory and anesthesia. Operating
room should be established and special surgery and
anesthetic items must be prepared[6]. It is important
to note that one case of neonatal infection with
pharyngeal swab virus positive in a 36-h baby has been
reported recently[3]. The existence of mother-to-child
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has not been confirmed,
although it was reported on the Lancet that there was no
vertical transmission of SARS-CoV-2[8]. It is necessary

4
to pay attention to the protection for newborns during
delivery and clean the newborns as soon as possible.
2.8 Postpartum Fever
After the pregnant giving birth, attention should
be paid to maternal fever. Postpartum fever may
occur due to the following physical characteristics:
decreased immunity originated from fatigue and
blood loss in childbirth, anatomy of female genitalia,
sweating during puerperium, and postpartum lactation.
Once postpartum fever occurs, differential diagnosis
to exclude breast swelling, mastitis, urinary tract
infections, common colds, and reproductive tract
infections must be focused on. Those with SARSCoV-2 infected pneumonia-related symptoms should
perform blood routine, respiratory virus testing and
chest CT examinations in a timely manner. If chest
CT shows imaging characteristics of NCP, the patient
should complete SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid tests
immediately. In the fever clinics, obstetricians and
gynecologists should attend to rule out obstetric fever
if necessary.
2.9 Breastfeeding Considerations
Close attention must be paid to the hygiene of
hands and breasts during breastfeeding. Suspected
cases, uncured clinically diagnosed cases and uncured
confirmed cases are not recommended to breastfeed.
Lopinavir/ritonavir can be secreted with the milk
of rats but it is uncertain whether the breast milk in
human contains ingredients of the drug. Therefore,
breastfeeding is not suggested while taking this
medicine. During the suspension of breastfeeding, it is
advised that the mother empties her breasts regularly.
3 FETAL MANAGEMENT
3.1 Diagnostic Criteria
Two conditions need to be met at the same time
for the diagnosis of newborns: ① Meet the diagnostic
criteria of Fifth Edition of Diagnosis and Treatment
Scheme; ② SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test is positive
regardless of whether the newborn has developed
symptoms or not.
3.2 Mode of Mother-to-child Transmission
It has been reported that a case of SARS-CoV-2
infection with positive nucleic acid of pharyngeal
swab virus occurred in a baby only 36 h after birth[3],
and the mother was a confirmed case of SARS-CoV-2
infection. Therefore, the existence of mother-to-child
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 remains to be verified.
The possible ways of SARS-CoV-2 infection are:
vertical transmission from mother to fetus, close contact
transmission, droplet transmission (family members,
family visitors) and hospital-acquired infections.
Newborns who meet any one of the followings
need to be examined: ① Pregnant women were
confirmed or suspected to SARS-CoV-2 infection;

Current Medical Science 40(2):2020

②Pregnant women were in close contact with family
members who were confirmed or highly suspected
of being infected; ③ In the process of caring for
newborns, family members were confirmed or highly
suspected to infection.
If the above situations happen, the newborn
should be isolated and observed immediately as soon
as possible, and nucleic acid tests should be carried out,
too. In addition, breastfeeding should not be performed
if the mother was infected by SARS-CoV-2[9].
3.3 Neonatal Isolation
Newborns who have been confirmed with SARSCoV-2 infection must be transferred to an isolated
observation ward for at least 14 days. If the delivery
institution does not have the conditions of a neonatal
isolation ward, the newborn must be transferred to
designated medical institutions that can isolate and
treat for them. Newborns suspected of having SARSCoV-2 infection should also be transferred to an
isolation ward for observation or treatment until the
recovery standard is met. Only when the mother is
negative of two consecutive SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid
tests (interval of 1 day) and under informed consent,
the mother and child can be in the same room[10].
3.3 Advice on Neonatal Nursing
During the COVID-19 epidemic, if the newborn
has no history of contact and no special discomfort,
such as fever, there is no need for routine investigation
but normal newborn care is required. Preventive
and control measures should be taken during home
care: single rooms with appropriate temperature and
humidity, minimizing caregivers, regular window
ventilation, caregivers washing hands and face often,
disinfecting the daily supplies of newborns, etc. It
is recommended to use 75% medical alcohol and
chlorine-containing disinfection water to wipe the
floor and furniture. Heat-resistant bottles and pacifiers
should be disinfected at high temperature[11, 12].
If mothers have been diagnosed or suspected to
have SARS-CoV-2 infection and newborns have not
yet completed disease screening and hearing testing,
they can go to the local maternity and child health care
institutions for additional newborn disease screening
and hearing testing after the end of the epidemic.
If vitamin K1 is not added to newborns at birth,
supplementation is also required.
Pregnant women are in a state of special immune
tolerance. The mucosa of upper respiratory tract (nose,
pharynx, trachea) is thickened, slightly congested
and edematous. In addition, immunity of newborns
is extremely poor. Both mothers and newborns are
prone to suffer from upper respiratory tract infection.
Meanwhile, because of being susceptible to SARSCoV-2, pregnant women are more likely to develope
complications or even progress to severe cases after
being infected with SARS-CoV-2[13], prevention and

5

Current Medical Science 40(2):2020

treatment become especially significant. This article
was formulated based on the currently available case
data and our experience of diagnosis and treatment.
According to the development of the epidemic and the
accumulation of experience in diagnosis and treatment,
the relevant content remains to be gradually improved.
Conflict of Interest Statement
None.

7

8

9

REFERENCES
1

2

3

4

5

6

National Health Commission of the People’s Republic
of China. New diagnosis and treatment scheme for
novel coronavirus infected pneumonia (Trial edition 5)
(Chinese) [R/OL]. [2020-02-05].
Medical Expert Group, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology. Quick guide for the diagnosis and
treatment of pneumonia infected by novel coronavirus
(Third edition) (Chinese)[EB/OL].[2020-01-28].
Wang SS, Guo LL, Chen L, et al. A case report of
neonatal COVID-19 infection in China [J/OL]. Clinical
infectious diseases: an official publication of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America [2020-3-12].
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Neonatal
Department, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology.
Guidance for maternal and fetal management during
pneumonia epidemics of novel coronavirus infection
in the Wuhan Tongji Hospital (First edition) (Chinese)
[EB/OL].[2020-01-28].
AIDS and Hepatitis C Professional Group, Society of
Infectious Diseases, Chinese Medical Association, et al.
Chinese guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of HIV/
AIDS (2018) (Chinese). Infectious Dis Information,
2018,06:481-499
Obstetric Disease Quality Control Center in Liaoning
Province, Critical Maternal Rescue Center in Liaoning
Province, Maternal and Fetal Medical Center in
Liaoning Province. Guidance on maternal management
during the epidemics of novel coronavirus in Liaoning
province (First edition) (Chinese) [J/OL]. Chin J Pract
Gynecol Obstet [2020-01-26].

10

11

12

13

World Health Organization. Clinical management
of severe acute respiratory infection when novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infection is suspected:
Interim guidance [EB/OL]. [2020-02-04].
Chen HJ, Guo JJ, Wang C, et al. Clinical characteristics
and intrauterine vertical transmission potential of
COVID-19 infection in nine pregnant women: a
retrospective review of medical records [J/OL]. Lancet
[2020-02-12].
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Neonatal
Department, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology.
Recommendations for management of pregnancy
complicated with novel coronavirus infection (Second
edition) (Chinese) [EB/OL]. [2020-01-28].
Neonatal Physician Branch of Chinese Physician
Association, Neonatal Health Professional Committee
of China Maternal and Child Health Association,
Perinatal Medical Branch of Chinese Medical
Association, Editorial Board of Chinese Journal of
Perinatal Medicine. Expert recommendations for the
prevention and control of 2019 novel coronavirus
infection in neonatal department. Chin J Perinatal Med,
2020,23(02):80-84
World Health Organization. Home care for patients with
suspected novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infection
presenting with mild symptoms and management of
contacts: Interim guidance [EB/OL]. [2020-02-04].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention
of the transmission of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
to families and communities in 2019: Interim guidance
[R/OL].
Maternal and Fetal Physician Professional Committee
of the Chinese Physician Association of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, Obstetrics Group of the Chinese
Medical Association of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Branch, Chinese Medical Association Perinatal
Medicine Branch, Editorial Board of Chinese Journal
of Perinatal Medicine. Expert suggestion on novel
coronavirus infection during pregnancy and postpartum
period (Chinese). Chin J Perinatal Med, 2020,23(02):7379
(Received Feb. 12, 2020; revised Mar. 14, 2020)

