www.nature.com/scientificreports


Ginkgolic acid inhibits fusion of enveloped viruses
Ronen Borenstein1,2*, Barbara A. Hanson1, Ruben M. Markosyan3, Elisa S. Gallo4,
Srinivas D. Narasipura5, Maimoona Bhutta2, Oren Shechter2, Nell S. Lurain4,
Fredric S. Cohen3, Lena Al-Harthi5 & Daniel A. Nicholson 1*
Ginkgolic acids (GA) are alkylphenol constituents of the leaves and fruits of Ginkgo biloba. GA has
shown pleiotropic effects in vitro, including: antitumor effects through inhibition of lipogenesis;
decreased expression of invasion associated proteins through AMPK activation; and potential rescue of
amyloid-β (Aβ) induced synaptic impairment. GA was also reported to have activity against Escherichia
coli and Staphylococcus aureus. Several mechanisms for this activity have been suggested including:
SUMOylation inhibition; blocking formation of the E1-SUMO intermediate; inhibition of fatty acid
synthase; non-specific SIRT inhibition; and activation of protein phosphatase type-2C. Here we report
that GA inhibits Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) by inhibition of both fusion and viral protein
synthesis. Additionally, we report that GA inhibits human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) genome replication
and Zika virus (ZIKV) infection of normal human astrocytes (NHA). We show a broad spectrum of fusion
inhibition by GA of all three classes of fusion proteins including HIV, Ebola virus (EBOV), influenza A
virus (IAV) and Epstein Barr virus (EBV). In addition, we show inhibition of a non-enveloped adenovirus.
Our experiments suggest that GA inhibits virion entry by blocking the initial fusion event. Data showing
inhibition of HSV-1 and CMV replication, when GA is administered post-infection, suggest a possible
secondary mechanism targeting protein and DNA synthesis. Thus, in light of the strong effect of GA on
viral infection, even after the infection begins, it may potentially be used to treat acute infections (e.g.
Coronavirus, EBOV, ZIKV, IAV and measles), and also topically for the successful treatment of active
lesions (e.g. HSV-1, HSV-2 and varicella-zoster virus (VZV)).
Ginkgolic acids are alkylphenol constituents of the leaves and fruits of Ginkgo biloba. Ginkgo biloba extracts
(GBE) have been used as herbal supplements since at least the 16th century and remain widely in use1. Major constituents of GBE include terpine trilactones (ginkgolide A, B, C, J, and bilobalide), flavonoid glycosides (quercetin
and rutin), as well as Ginkgolic acids2. Ginkgolic acids are a mixture of several 2-hydroxy-6-alkylbenzoic acids in
which the most common alkyl chains contain 13, 15, or 17 carbons. The 15 and 17 carbon chains are unsaturated
at positions 8 and 10, respectively. The 3 Ginkgolic acid (GA) structures are, therefore, designated C13:0, C15:1,
and C17:1 (Table S1)3.
GA has shown pleiotropic effects in vitro, including: antitumor effects through inhibition of lipogenesis;
decreased expression of invasion associated proteins through AMPK activation; potential rescue of amyloid-β
(Aβ) induced synaptic impairment; and inhibition of HIV protease activity as well as HIV viral replication4–7. GA
was also reported to have activity against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus8. Several ways in which GA
works have been suggested including by SUMOylation inhibition activity; blocking formation of the E1-SUMO
intermediate9; inhibition of fatty acid synthase10; non-specific SIRT inhibition11; and activation of protein phosphatase type-2C12.
Here we report that GA shows antiviral activity against Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), and Zika virus (ZIKV) primarily through viral fusion inhibition. In addition, we show inhibition of entry of a replication-defective non-enveloped adenovirus. The antiviral effects were observed below the
cytotoxic threshold. We believe that broad spectrum antiviral activity is achieved through the inhibition of viral
entry and that this effect could be therapeutically utilized systemically in the context of severe acute viral disease,
or topically for the treatment of cutaneous viral lesions. We show a broad spectrum of fusion inhibition by GA
of all three classes of fusion proteins13 including: pathogenic human enveloped viruses from Class I (ZIKV, HIV,
EBOV, and influenza A virus (IAV)), Class II (Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) and Semliki Forest
virus (SFV)), and Class III (vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and Epstein Barr virus (EBV)). Taken together, our
experiments suggest that GA inhibits viral entry by blocking the initial fusion event.
In reporting the results of our experiments, we apply the term “infection” to measurements of virus cytopathic
effect in permissive cells, and the term “replication” to the measurement of genome copies or protein expression.
We chose to use GA C15:1 as the main GA type in our experiments because it is the one most used experimentally to date. However, we also tested GA C13:0 and GA C17:1 in some of our experiments. Unless stated
otherwise, GA C15:1 was used.

The toxicity EC50 of GA on HEp-2 cells in MEM supplemented with 1% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) was 27.63 ± 2.21 μM (Fig. S1A) or 63.5 ± 3.2 μM (Fig. S1B) on cells supplemented with 5% FBS. In
cells infected with HCMV strain CH19 and supplemented with 1% FBS, the 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50)
was 6.83 ± 1.08 μM, and with 10% bovine serum, the IC50 of GA was 41 μM (Fig. 1A). The toxicity EC50 of GA
on HFF cells was 14.00 μM ± 0.1 in MEM medium supplemented with 1% FBS (Fig. S1C), and 137.04 μM ± 10.44
(Fig. S1D) in MEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS. The results indicated that the activity and toxicity of
GA is affected by the serum concentration in the medium (see discussion).

GA inhibits HCMV infection in human foreskin fibroblasts (HFF). To assess the effect of GA on
HCMV infection, dilutions of 1 µM to 20 µM were made (Fig. 1A). Monolayers of human foreskin fibroblasts
(HFF) were incubated for 1 hour with GA and then infected with two cell-associated clinical isolates of HCMV:
Scientific Reports 
CH1914 and BI-615. Because neither virus produces extracellular virus, plates for plaque assays were inoculated
with 50–100 infected cells per well, and then treated with medium containing 1–20 µM GA, or vehicle control.
Viral infection was allowed to progress for 7 days, and then quantitated by plaque reduction assay14. GA inhibited
infection of BI-6 and CH19 with an IC50 of 7.26 ± 0.92 μM and 6.83 ± 1.08 μM, respectively.
To further assess the effect of GA on plaque formation, we used the CMVPT30-GFP strain, which produces
cell-free virions. HFF monolayers in 24-well plates pretreated with GA (1–20 µM) for 1 h were inoculated with
50–100 plaque-forming units of CMVPT30-GFP per well.16, (Fig. 1B). The number of plaques were counted
after 7 days and the IC50 was determined. As predicted by the previously-determined IC50, at 5 and at 10 µM the
antiviral effect was apparent. Furthermore, at 10 µM, only single cells were infected, indicating that there was no
cell-to-cell virus transmission. These results may be explained as inhibition of secondary infections or that viral
entry may be a target of GA. To verify these results, we compared the inhibition of infection by GA using a plaque
reduction assay (PRA) similar to the PRA for ganciclovir (GCV), the preferred antiviral HCMV drug of choice.
The results showed that although there was strong inhibition of the virus at 16 µM GCV, there were still visible
plaques (>5 adjacent cells showing HCMV cytopathic effect) indicating cell-to-cell transmission of the virions.
On the contrary, CMVPT30-GFP infected monolayers that were treated with 10 µM GA only displayed individual
infected cells in intact HFF monolayers, (Fig. 1C), thus indicating no cell-cell transmission. We also tested GA
C17:1 and GA C13:0. Both GA compounds had a strong inhibitory effect on HCMV infection by PRA, similar to
GA C15:1 (Fig. 1D,E). None of the GA structures showed cytotoxicity at their active concentrations, respectively.

GA inhibits HSV-1 and ZIKV infection. We tested GA on HSV-1, a rapidly replicating and lytic DNA
virus, and on ZIKV, an RNA virus which has neither glycoprotein conservation nor common receptors with
HCMV or HSV-1. To test whether GA inhibits HSV-1, we designed an experiment to test the direct effect of GA
on the virus. For this experiment, we used HEp-2 and 293T cells. 1 × 107 PFU HSV-1 strain F was treated for
1 hour with GA (50 µM) or with vehicle in serum free DMEM and then each of these were used to infect HEp2 or
293T cells at an MOI of 0.5 in 199V medium with a final concentration of 2.5 µM GA. As a control, the virus that
was originally treated with the vehicle was then supplemented also with 2.5 µM GA. To test for successful viral
infection of HEp2 and 293T cells, production of HSV-1 immediate early (ICP27), early (ICP8), and late (US11)
proteins was analyzed by Western Blot (Fig. 2A,B). The results showed that in the treated HSV-1 F stock there was
complete inhibition of viral replication, as indicated by lack of protein synthesis. This implies that viral entry may
be a target of GA, because direct treatment of HSV-1 with GA blocks downstream HSV-1 protein production. To
test the effect of GA on HSV-1 replication, HEp2 cell monolayers were grown to 90% confluency in a 6-well plate,
treated with 10 µM GA C15:1 or vehicle for 1 hour in 199V medium, and then inoculated with HSV-1 strain F
for protein analysis. HSV-1 ICP27, ICP8, and US11 proteins were detected by Western Blot (Fig. 2C). The results
showed profound inhibition of immediate early, early, and late viral proteins. The inhibition of the full temporal
range of HSV-1 proteins implies that inhibition of viral replication occurs by blocking the entry of virions into
the target cell. To evaluate the effect of GA on progeny virions, the supernatant of GFP-HSV-1 strain 17+ infected
Vero cells at an MOI of 1 was collected after 20 h and titered by plaque reduction assay (Fig. 2D). The results
showed a significant decrease of approximately 2 log in the GA-treated cell titers.
To test the effect of GA on ZIKV infection, NHA were grown to 90% confluency in a 24-well plate, treated with
GA or DMSO for 3 hours without serum and then infected with ZIKV strain PRVABC59 at an MOI of 0.3. The
next day, supernatant was replaced with fresh medium containing GA or DMSO and cells were incubated at 37 °C,
5% CO2. On day 7, viability was determined with the MTS Cell Proliferation Assay (Promega), and then these
cells were harvested to extract total RNA for quantification of ZIKV RNA by Taqman based qRT-PCR. The results
showed 70% to 80% viability at 5 µM to 20 µM GA, compared to less than 40% viability for the vehicle-treated
cells. Furthermore, an 80–90% decrease in ZIKV RNA was observed at 5 µM to 20 µM GA (Fig. 3A,B). We concluded that GA inhibits entry of Zika virions and prevents NHA cell death. This suggests that the mechanism of
inhibition that appears to be targeted in HSV and HCMV by GA is conserved among enveloped viruses that have
no homologous glycoproteins and use different cell receptors for entry. To test the direct effect of GA on ZIKV,
5 × 105 PFU ZIKV were treated for 1 hour with GA (10 µM/ml) or with vehicle in 199V medium, and then were
used to infect Vero cells at an MOI of 0.5. Supernatant was collected at 4, 24 and 48 hours post-inoculation for
cell free viral RNA copy number determination (Fig. 3C). The results indicated that the GA-treated ZIKV was
completely inhibited, as indicated by cell free ZIKV RNA copy number. This suggests that viral entry of ZIKV,
may be a target of GA because direct treatment of ZIKV with GA blocks downstream ZIKV RNA production.
GA inhibits a non-enveloped adenovirus.

