Therapeutics and Prevention

crossm
Hiding in Plain Sight: an Approach to Treating Patients with
Severe COVID-19 Infection
David S. Fedson,a Steven M. Opal,b Ole Martin Rordamc
57, chemin du Lavoir, Sergy Haut, France
Department of Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA

Patients with COVID-19 infection are at risk of acute respiratory disease
syndrome (ARDS) and death. The tissue receptor for COVID-19 is ACE2, and higher
levels of ACE2 can protect against ARDS. Angiotensin receptor blockers and statins
upregulate ACE2. Clinical trials are needed to determine whether this drug combination might be used to treat patients with severe COVID-19 infection.
KEYWORDS COVID-19, endothelial dysfunction, generic drugs, host response

treatment The severe respiratory disease that has recently emerged in China is caused by a
novel coronavirus (COVID-19) (1). The virus is similar to the SARS coronavirus that
spread internationally in 2003, infected more than 8,000 people, and killed almost 800.
Infection with COVID-19 has now spread throughout the world, causing widespread
social and economic disruption. To control its spread, Chinese ofﬁcials have imposed
extensive travel bans and quarantined large areas. Accelerated development of new
vaccines and treatments is already under way. It is too early to know whether any of
these efforts will contain the outbreak.
Thus far, patients hospitalized with severe COVID-19 infection have had pneumonia
(2). Of 44,672 laboratory-conﬁrmed patients, almost 5% have had critical illness and
almost 50% of critically ill patients have died (3). The overall case fatality rate (2.3%) has
been higher than that seen with seasonal inﬂuenza. Most deaths have involved older
adults, many of whom have had underlying chronic illnesses. Although there is no
known treatment for any coronavirus infection, investigators in China have undertaken
several clinical trials. Except for corticosteroids, all of the drugs being tested target
coronavirus replication. Unfortunately, very few of these antiviral drugs will be available
to people who have been (or will be) infected with COVID-19. Yet, for those who
develop severe disease, only one question matters: “will I live or die?” This is the
question that clinical investigators should address. Could they discover a treatment that
might reduce the severity of COVID-19 infection and improve patient survival?
In 2014, one of us suggested that statins might be used to treat patients with Ebola
virus disease (4). A supply of a generic statin and a generic angiotensin receptor blocker
(ARB) was sent to Sierra Leone. Experimental studies had shown that both drugs
improved outcomes in experimental acute lung injury/acute respiratory disease syndrome (ARDS) (5–9). In Sierra Leone, local physicians treated approximately 100 Ebola
patients with a combination of the two drugs. They noted “remarkable improvement”
in survival. Although there was no support for a proper clinical trial, the ﬁndings from
this unconventional and poorly documented treatment experience were published (10,
11). During the current Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC),
expensive vaccines are being used. Investigational monoclonal antibody preparations
(12), but not inexpensive generic drug treatments (13), have been tested. There are
March/April 2020 Volume 11 Issue 2 e00398-20

