Journal of Integrative Medicine 18 (2020) 152–158

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Integrative Medicine
journal homepage: www.jcimjournal.com/jim
www.journals.elsevier.com/journal-of-integrative-medicine

Methodology

In silico screening of Chinese herbal medicines with the potential to
directly inhibit 2019 novel coronavirus
Deng-hai Zhang a,⇑, Kun-lun Wu b, Xue Zhang a, Sheng-qiong Deng c, Bin Peng a
a
Shanghai Health Commission Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Based Management of Inflammation and Chronic Diseases, Sino-French Cooperative Central Lab, Shanghai
Pudong Gongli Hospital, Secondary Military Medical University, Shanghai 200135, China
b
Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai Pudong Gongli Hospital, Secondary Military Medical University, Shanghai 200135, China
c
Department of Research Affair Management, Shanghai Pudong Gongli Hospital, Secondary Military Medical University, Shanghai 200135, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 7 February 2020
Accepted 13 February 2020
Available online 20 February 2020
Keywords:
2019-nCoV
Wuhan coronavirus
Drugs
Chinese herbal
Pneumonia
Natural compounds
Molecular docking
Network pharmacology

a b s t r a c t
Objective: In this study we execute a rational screen to identify Chinese medical herbs that are commonly
used in treating viral respiratory infections and also contain compounds that might directly inhibit 2019
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), an ongoing novel coronavirus that causes pneumonia.
Methods: There were two main steps in the screening process. In the first step we conducted a literature
search for natural compounds that had been biologically confirmed as against sever acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus or Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Resulting compounds were
cross-checked for listing in the Traditional Chinese Medicine Systems Pharmacology Database.
Compounds meeting both requirements were subjected to absorption, distribution, metabolism and
excretion (ADME) evaluation to verify that oral administration would be effective. Next, a docking analysis was used to test whether the compound had the potential for direct 2019-nCoV protein interaction.
In the second step we searched Chinese herbal databases to identify plants containing the selected compounds. Plants containing 2 or more of the compounds identified in our screen were then checked against
the catalogue for classic herbal usage. Finally, network pharmacology analysis was used to predict the
general in vivo effects of each selected herb.
Results: Of the natural compounds screened, 13 that exist in traditional Chinese medicines were also
found to have potential anti-2019-nCoV activity. Further, 125 Chinese herbs were found to contain
2 or more of these 13 compounds. Of these 125 herbs, 26 are classically catalogued as treating viral
respiratory infections. Network pharmacology analysis predicted that the general in vivo roles of these
26 herbal plants were related to regulating viral infection, immune/inflammation reactions and hypoxia
response.
Conclusion: Chinese herbal treatments classically used for treating viral respiratory infection might
contain direct anti-2019-nCoV compounds.
Please cite this article as: Zhang DH, Wu KL, Zhang X, Deng SQ, Peng B. In silico screening of Chinese herbal
medicines with the potential to directly inhibit 2019 novel coronavirus. J Integr Med. 2020; 18(2): 152–
158.
Ó 2020 Shanghai Changhai Hospital. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Toward the end of December 2019, a novel coronavirus (2019nCoV) with human-to-human transmission and severe human
infection, originating in Wuhan, China, was identified [1]. This
virus has affected many persons in China and spread to other countries in a very short time. On January 30, 2020, the Director⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: shanghai_zhang@hotmail.com (D.H. Zhang).

General of the World Health Organization declared that the outbreak of 2019-nCoV constitutes a public health emergency of international concern and issued temporary recommendations under
the International Health Regulations [2]. According to the Daily
Report of China National Health Commission, as of this writing
on February 2, 2020, 14,488 cases, including 304 deaths, have been
confirmed in China; 146 cases, including 1 death, have also been
reported among 23 other countries. This pandemic is still ongoing,
so it is urgent to find new preventive and therapeutic agents as
soon as possible. In addition, commensurate with the risk, strong

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joim.2020.02.005
2095-4964/Ó 2020 Shanghai Changhai Hospital. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

D.-h. Zhang et al. / Journal of Integrative Medicine 18 (2020) 152–158

measures for early detection, isolation and treatment of cases, as
well as minimization of transmission through social interaction
must be implemented.
While specific vaccines and antiviral agents are the most effective methods to prevent and treat viral infection, there are not yet
effective treatments that target the 2019-nCoV. Development of
these treatments may require months or years, meaning that a
more immediate treatment or control mechanism should be found
if possible. Herbs used in traditional Chinese medicine present a
potentially valuable resource to this end. The effectiveness of
herbal treatment to control contagious disease was demonstrated
during the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak [3]. As such, the Chinese government is encouraging the
use of herbal plants in fighting this new viral pneumonia. However,
the application of herbal treatment is mainly guided by the type of
herb (based on the catalogue of classic literature on herbs) and the
patient’s symptoms or signs. There is often not enough information
to predetermine whether the herbs in question can directly target
the viral cause, in other words, herbal usage is generally not guided
by viral pathology. We think more detailed knowledge about the
direct antiviral effects of different plants would be greatly helpful
to the doctors selecting them.
In fact, after the outbreak of SARS, many groups dedicated
themselves to finding anti-coronavirus agents, including some natural compounds that exist in traditional Chinese herbal medicines
[4–12]. The coronavirus encodes more than one dozen proteins,
some of which are essential to viral entry and replication. Among
these proteins, the most well-studied are papain-like protease
(PLpro), 3C-like protease (3CLpro) and spike protein. Coronavirus
PLpro not only processes the viral polypeptide onto functional proteins but is also a deubiquitinating enzyme that can dampen host
anti-viral response by hijacking the ubiquitin (Ub) system. For
example, SARS PLpro cleaves ISG15, a two-domain Ub-like protein,
and Lys48-linked polyUb chains, releasing diUbLys48 products
[13,14]. SARS-3CLpro is a cysteine protease indispensable to the
viral life cycle [15]. Coronavirus spike protein uses angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 as a receptor to help the virus enter cells
[16]. These three proteins make attractive targets for drug
development.
Through in silico and biological processing, a series of small
molecules, including those from natural compounds, have been
screened and confirmed to directly inhibit these important
proteins in SARS or Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)
coronavirus [17–23]. The gene sequence of 2019-nCoV has been
released, which suggests high similarities between the main proteins in this virus and those previously identified in SARS-Cov or
MERS-Cov [24,25]. In this sense, previously reported anti-SARSCov or anti-MERS-Cov natural compounds may become a valuable
guide to finding anti-coronavirus (2019-nCoV) herbal plants
among the traditional Chinese herbs used to treat viral pneumonia.
It is a challenge to screen out the herbs containing anticoronavirus (2019-nCoV) compounds from the large number of
those possibly being used for patients infected with this pathogen,
especially in very short time. Here, we propose two principles to
guide such work: oral effectiveness and traditional usage compatibility. The first principle refers to the fact that most Chinese herbal
plants are orally ingested after boiling with water, meaning that
the anti-coronavirus (2019-nCoV) ingredients in selected plants
should be absorbable via oral preparation. The second principle
recognizes that candidate plants should be consistent with the
type classifications for traditional herbal usage, since type-guided
applications are integral to herbal use, as mentioned above. Following these two principles, we used a 6-step selection process
(3 for each principle), including drug-likeness, evaluation of oral
bioavailability, molecular docking, network pharmacology analysis
and other methods to identify herbs that have both a high possibil-

153

ity of containing effective anti-coronavirus (2019-nCoV) compounds and are classified as treating virus-caused respiratory
infection.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Literature search and compound selection
PubMed literature concerning natural compounds against SARS
or MERS coronavirus activity was selected using the query
‘‘coronavirus AND inhibitor AND (SARS OR MERS OR SARS-CoV
OR MERS-CoV).” After careful reading of the studies returned by
this search, the natural compounds that had biologically confirmed
antiviral activities were compared with the Traditional Chinese
Medicine Systems Pharmacology database (TCMSP, http://www.
tcmspw.com/browse.php?qc=herbs), the Encyclopedia of Traditional Chinese Medicine (ETCM, http://www.nrc.ac.cn:9090/
ETCM/) and SymMap (https://www.symmap.org/). Natural
compounds both associated with antiviral activity and contained
in herbs were examined in the next step of our study.
2.2. ADME screening of natural compounds
Since Chinese herbal treatments are always taken orally after
boiling with water, an in silico integrative model of absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) was used to screen for
natural compounds that may be bioactive via oral administration.
The indices used for the screening include evaluation of oral
bioavailability, Caco-2 permeability, drug-like value, and drug
half-life. The threshold values indicating effectiveness for these
four indices were > 30%, > 0.4, > 0.18 and > 3 h, respectively, as
recommended by Hu et al [26]. The values of these four indices
can be obtained from the TCMSP database.
2.3. Protein-molecular docking
We used molecular docking software AutoDock 4 to perform
protein compound docking analysis, according to the following
procedure: (1) We built three-dimensional (3D) structure files of
the proteins of interest. We used the online server SWISS-MODEL
(https://swissmodel.expasy.org/) to build the 3D structures of the
proteins of interest by template-based modeling, these template
structures being the reported 3D structures of the corresponding
proteins from SARS-CoV. The models built were of Protein Data
Bank (PDB) format. (2) To retrieve the required 3D structure files
of compounds, the structure data file (SDF) format of compounds
were retrieved from the PubChem website and then converted to
PDB format by Discovery Studio. (3) AutoDock 4.2 was used to prepare PDBQT format files for target and ligand screening (Target.
pdbqt and Ligand.pdbqt) and grid and docking parameter files
(a.gpf and a.dpf). (4) Molecular docking was performed using AutoDock in Cygwin and finally the results were analyzed. The process
and parameters used were detailed by Rizvi et al [27].
2.4. Plant selection
Herbs were selected through three steps. (1) Primary selection:
molecules chosen from the above steps were used as input for the
TCMSP, ETCM and SymMap to search for plants containing that
input and the plants were filtered by the numbers of antiviral compounds they contain. Those containing 2 or more antiviral compounds were selected for the next step. (2) Classic usage
catalogue cross-reference: only herbs traditionally used
to treat viral respiratory infection were retained for further study.

154

D.-h. Zhang et al. / Journal of Integrative Medicine 18 (2020) 152–158

(3) Predication of general effects in vivo with network pharmacology analysis, which is detailed as follows.

performed ADME screening for the 115 natural compounds, reducing the number of candidates to 13.

2.5. Network pharmacology analysis

3.3. Docking between selected compounds and their reported targets

The TCMSP provided the main components of each herb and the
protein targets for each component. We identified the reported
chemical constituents for each plant in the final analysis and used
the ADME indices listed above to find the orally absorbable and
drug-like compounds for the plant. The protein targets of these
compounds were downloaded from the TCMSP database. All protein targets for each individual plant were used as input for the
String online server (https://string-db.org/) to perform protein–
protein interaction analysis and pathway enrichment. Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways enriched
(with P < 0.01) by the input were downloaded.
All data were processed using the statistical language R (3.6.2),
unless otherwise specified.

To perform the docking analysis, the 3D structure files of 2019nCoV PLpro, 3CLpro and spike proteins were built based on the corresponding SARS-CoV templates, i.e., PDB 5e6j, 1uj1 and 6cad,
respectively. Then, molecule-protein docking was carried out
between the molecules and their reported targets. If the molecules
were reported to inhibit viral entry, they were docked with spike
proteins (Table 1). Each separate analysis returned positive results
(Table 1, Fig. 2 and online supplementary Fig. S1), indicating the
natural compounds we selected might directly inhibit 2019nCoV. The molecules selected to target PLpro (M2, M3, M7, M9,
M10, M11 and M13) mainly bound in the region between the
thumb and palm domains, which might interfere with substrate
entering this enzyme’s active sites, located at the bottom of the
two domains [29]. The molecules reported to inhibit 3CLpro (M1,
M2, M3, M4, M5, M7, M8, M10, M11, M12 and M13) mainly
entered the region between domains 2 and 3, and this region is
important for 3CLpro to form a dimmer [30]. M6 was reported to
inhibit viral entry, accordingly it bound the fusion cone of spike
protein; this cone structure is important for viral membrane fusion
[31] (Fig. 2 and online supplementary Fig. S1).

3. Results
3.1. Overlapping of natural compounds biologically confirmed to be
anti-SARS or anti-MERS coronavirus in literature and in Chinese herbal
database
We received 261 hits from conducting our search in the
PubMed database. After careful evaluation of the abstracts from
these citations we downloaded and carefully analyzed the full text
of 23 highly relevant papers. The natural compounds reported to
have biologically confirmed anti-coronavirus activity were identified and then compared to the ingredients listed in three Chinese
herbal databases. The result was 115 overlapping ingredients,
which we used for further testing (Fig. 1).
3.2. Filtration of compounds selected by ADME
The antiviral activities of the 115 natural compounds were
reportedly confirmed with enzyme-based (cell-free) or cell-based
experimental systems. To be utilized as a Chinese herbal medicine,
they must be absorbable via oral prescription. Therefore, we

Part 1
Oral effectiveness/anti-2019-nCoV compound selection

3.4. Selection of antiviral herbal plants
The 13 molecules passing the three-round selection process
were then compared to the three Chinese herbal databases, and
we found 230 herbs containing these molecules (online supplementary file Table S1). We then evaluated these herbs for those
containing 2 or more of the 13 natural compounds, leaving 125
results. We cross-referenced the 125 results with the classic categorizations for herbal usage in the TCMSP database, finally choosing
11 types that are traditionally used to treat viral respiratory infections. There are 26 herbal plants within the 11 types. The timeframe
during the course of a viral infection that each of these 26 herbal
plants (Table 2) should be used was also documented by seeking
advice from senior practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine.
For example, plants catalogued as antipyretic detoxifying drugs,

Part 2
Traditional usage-compatible herbal selection
Step 1

Step 1
Literature search and comparison with
3 Chinese herbal databases

Cross-referencing with 3 Chinese herbal databases

Plants containing at least
two selected antiviral compounds

Compounds both antiviral and
existing in Chinese herbal medicines
Step 2
Step 2

Classic catalogue assignment and selection
(according to TCMSPT)

Filtered with ADME indices
(absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion)

Plants classically used for
treating virus-caused respiratory infections

Orally absorbable compounds
Step 3
Compound viral protein docking

Natural compounds
possibly directly inhibiting 2019-nCoV

Step 3
Network pharmacology analysis for each selected plant

In-vivo general effects of the plant predicted
suitable for viral infection treatment

Fig. 1. Workflow scheme. The work is divided into two main parts, natural compound selection and herbal plant selection. Each part consists of three steps. As detailed in the
text, oral effectiveness is important in compound selection, while in the plant selection portion, the selected herbs should be compatible with the classic usages of herbal
treatment in traditional Chinese medicine. TCMSP: Traditional Chinese Medicine Systems Pharmacology.

155

D.-h. Zhang et al. / Journal of Integrative Medicine 18 (2020) 152–158
Table 1
The molecules and their docking proteins, binding energy (kcal/mol).
No.



3CLpro: 3C-like protease; PLpro: papain-like protease.

Fig. 2. Docking between selected natural compounds and their reported targets. A. PLpro and natural compound M2; B. 3CL and M1; C. Spike and M6. Docking is performed
with AutoDock 4 which is detailed in Materials and Methods. The protein structure files are listed in Table 1. Protein domains are shown in different colors, while natural
compounds are shown in dark yellow. The amino acids labeled were those interacting with compound. 3CLpro: 3C-like protease; PLpro: papain-like protease.

qi-reinforcing drugs, antitussive antiasthmatics, pungent cool
diaphoretics and phlegm-resolving medicines may all be used
throughout the course of infection, whereas drugs belonging to
the interior warming group may be best utilized in prevention.

3.5. Network analysis of possible effects or mechanisms
Each of the potentially effective herbal remedies contains many
ingredients in addition to the antiviral ones found here. Thus, the

156

D.-h. Zhang et al. / Journal of Integrative Medicine 18 (2020) 152–158

The number of antiviral natural compounds contained in the plant.

general effects of each plant should be examined by combining the
effects of all of the orally absorbable and biologically active ingredients in it. To evaluate the possible general in vivo effects of each
of our identified herbs, we used the ADME indices listed above to
examine each of the orally absorbable and drug-like ingredients
recorded in the TCMSP database for each plant. We then extracted
the target proteins for each ingredient which had passed the
screening process. All proteins belonging to a single plant were
combined as input on the online protein–protein interaction analysis server, String, to find the pathway enrichment.
For the 26 herbs, about 1/3 of the top 30 KEGG-enriched pathways (mean = 11) were related to regulating viral infection,
immune/inflammatory reactions and hypoxia response, indicating
that they are potentially effective treatments for viral respiratory
infection (Fig. 3 and online supplementary Fig. S2). Note that some
of the herbal plants selected here had been reported to be effective
for SARS-CoV infection in 2003 (online supplementary Table S2).

4. Discussion
In this work, we undertook a multiple step selection process
and screened out 26 herbal plants with a high probability of
directly inhibiting the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), possibly
providing instant help in the prevention and treatment of the
pneumonia that it can cause. While mainly in China at this point,
viral spread is ongoing and has affect persons worldwide.
Two principles guided our screening work. The first is that the
anti-coronavirus (2019-nCoV) components contained in the source
plants should be absorbable via oral prescription. This principle
requires that the herbs selected should contain biologically proven
anti-coronavirus (2019-nCoV) ingredients, and that these natural
compounds should pass the drug-likeness and oral bioavailability
evaluations. Therefore, we conducted a three-step screening process. First, we extracted natural compounds verified in PubMed
as being effective in treating SARS or MERS coronavirus and then

cross-checked these compounds in the Chinese herbal databases.
There were 115 overlapping compounds. This method was an
expeditious way to identify natural components both preexisting in Chinese herbal treatment and having a high possibility
of anti-coronavirus (2019-nCoV) activity. This is important, as the
anti-coronavirus effects of the selected compounds have been
biologically confirmed, and the genetic similarities between coronavirus (2019-nCoV) and SARS or MERS coronavirus are high
[24,25].
The anti-coronavirus effects of the natural compounds screened
by the above method have been mainly confirmed in vitro by direct
loading onto cultured cells, thus it does not guarantee their effectiveness in vivo, especially with oral preparation—the principal
way in which Chinese herbals are administered. Therefore, to meet
the first principle, we ran ADME filters on the natural compounds
selected by 4 indices, as used by Hu et al. [26]. Among the 115
compounds highlighted by our first step, only 13 passed this
screening, showing the necessity of such a test.
The novel coronavirus has some mutations when compared to
SARS or MERS coronavirus, so the natural compounds effectiveness
against the two previous coronaviruses might not be present in the
new virus. To reduce this risk, and as the third step of our first principle, we reconstructed the 3D structure of the new coronavirus
using the reported structures of SARS and MERS coronavirus proteins as a guide, and then used molecular docking technology to
simulate whether the 13 natural compounds selected could combine with the structures we constructed for the new coronavirus
proteins. All 13 compounds could bind to the proteins as predicted
for the new coronavirus. We believe that the high success rate of
our docking screening was due to the high genetic similarity
between the new coronavirus and the SARS or MERS virus [24,25].
Our second principle for screening should also be emphasized
and elaborated upon. It states that the selected herbal plants must
conform to traditional usages. There are many kinds of Chinese
herbs that have been used for thousands of years. Based on this
rich history and experience, Chinese herbal medicines are divided

D.-h. Zhang et al. / Journal of Integrative Medicine 18 (2020) 152–158

157

Fig. 3. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways enriched for the herb Forsythiae Fructus in network pharmacology analysis. The top 30 pathways are shown. The
blue, red and green bars represent the pathways related to viral infection, immune/inflammation response, and hypoxia response, respectively. EGFR: epidermal growth
factor receptor; AGE: advanced glycation end product; RAGE: receptor for AGE.

into different types, each type dedicated to certain kinds of diseases. Ignoring these grouping guidelines can lead to serious side
effects. Therefore, as a further condition for the medicine screened
here, we verified that they have been routinely used to treat viral
pneumonia. To meet this principle, we conducted another threestep screening process for the herbal plants.
First, we searched the Chinese medicine database for herbs containing the 13 natural compounds identified. Herbs containing at
least 2 of these potentially useful compounds were selected, and
a total of 125 herbal plants were identified. The second step in targeted plant selection was based on type classification. Of the 125
results, only 26 herbs were found to be routinely used in treating
viral respiratory infection.
Finally, network pharmacological analysis was performed to
predict the possible therapeutic effects of these 26 plants. Because
Chinese herbal medicines contain many ingredients, and multiple
absorbable ingredients might exert their effects on the body, the
general effects of herbs may be dictated by all of the absorbable
ingredients they contain. With this consideration in mind, we
extracted the recorded ingredients of each of the plants selected
from the Chinese medicine database and screened these ingredients for drug-likeness and oral availability (via ADME filter)
[26,32]. The target proteins of all ingredients passing ADME selection were used for network enrichment to predict the general
effects of the herbal plants. For all the plants analyzed, nearly half
of the top 30 pathways enriched in KEGG are related to antiviral,
immune/inflammatory responses and hypoxia response indicating
that these herbs are suitable for anti-viral usage. In fact, some of
the herbal plants selected here had been reported effective in
against SARS-CoV infection in 2003 (online supplementary
Table S2). We thought that the general antiviral and immune/inflammation effects predicted for the 26 plants are correlated with

the fact that these plants were selected according to Chinese herbal
type classifications.
Of course, it should be pointed out that Chinese herbs that have
not been identified through this screening process may still have
beneficial effects. Further, considering that the biologically validated natural compounds reported in the literature cannot cover
all antiviral natural compounds, and the natural compounds
included in the Chinese medicine database are not complete, the
process that we have followed may have excluded herbs that
would be well suited to this treatment. Nevertheless, the purpose
of this screening was to provide a rational approach for selecting
Chinese herbal medicines with a high potential efficacy in treating
2019-nCoV and related viruses. The specific dosage and usage of
each herb should be determined based on patients’ manifestations.
Finally, the key step in this screening was molecular docking. The
3D structures of the proteins used here are based on reported gene
sequences. If the virus mutates during transmission, a new screening is recommended.
In conclusion, this work has identified several Chinese medicinal plants classified as antiviral/pneumonia-effective that might
directly inhibit the novel coronavirus, 2019-nCoV. Additionally,
we propose screening principles and methods which may provide
guidance in screening antiviral drugs from other natural drug
databases.

Author contributions
DZ conceived the study, participated in its design, coordination,
and all the work processes. KW participated in herbal selection. XZ
participated in data collection and network pharmacology analysis.
SD helped to collect data. BP helped to draft the manuscript.

158

D.-h. Zhang et al. / Journal of Integrative Medicine 18 (2020) 152–158

Funding
This work is supported by Shanghai Leading Talent Grants in
Medicine (No. 2019LG26), Shanghai Traditional Chinese Medicine
Content Construction Innovation Project (No. ZY3-CCCX-3-7001)
and Postdoctoral Funding of Shanghai Gongil Hospital (No.
GLBH2017002).

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

Acknowledgement
[16]

Thanks to Mr. Steven Schwab for tidying up the English
expressions and grammar.

[17]

Conflicts of interest
[18]

The authors declare no competing interests.
[19]

Appendix A. Supplementary data
[20]

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joim.2020.02.005.

[21]

References



[1] Paraskevis D, Kostaki EG, Magiorkinis G, Panayiotakopoulos G, Sourvinos G,
Tsiodras S. Full-genome evolutionary analysis of the novel corona virus (2019nCoV) rejects the hypothesis of emergence as a result of a recent
recombination event. Infect Genet Evol 2020;79:104212.
[2] World Health Organization. Statement on the second meeting of the
International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding the
outbreak of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). (2020-01-30) [2020-02-02].
https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/30-01-2020-statement-on-the-secondmeeting-of-the-international-health-regulations-(2005)-emergency-committeeregarding-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov).
[3] Chen Z, Nakamura T. Statistical evidence for the usefulness of Chinese
medicine in the treatment of SARS. Phytother Res 2004;18(7):592–4.
[4] Lai L, Han X, Chen H, Wei P, Huang C, Liu S, et al. Quaternary structure,
substrate selectivity and inhibitor design for SARS 3C-like proteinase. Cur
Pharm Des 2006;12(35):4555–64.
[5] Wang SQ, Du QS, Zhao K, Li AX, Wei DQ, Chou KC. Virtual screening for finding
natural inhibitor against cathepsin-L for SARS therapy. Amino Acids 2007;33
(1):129–35.
[6] Kesel AJ. Synthesis of novel test compounds for antiviral chemotherapy of
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). Curr Med Chem 2005;12
(18):2095–162.
[7] Wu CY, Jan JT, Ma SH, Kuo CJ, Juan HF, Cheng YS, et al. Small molecules
targeting severe acute respiratory syndrome human coronavirus. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2004;101(27):10012–7.
[8] Liu B, Zhou J. SARS-CoV protease inhibitors design using virtual screening
method from natural products libraries. J Comput Chem 2005;26(5):484–90.
[9] Hoever G, Baltina L, Michaelis M, Kondratenko R, Baltina L, Tolstikov GA, et al.
Antiviral activity of glycyrrhizic acid derivatives against SARS-coronavirus. J
Med Chem 2005;48(4):1256–9.
[10] Li SY, Chen C, Zhang HQ, Guo HY, Wang H, Wang L, et al. Identification of
natural compounds with antiviral activities against SARS-associated
coronavirus. Antiviral Res 2005;67(1):18–23.
[11] Chen L, Li J, Luo C, Liu H, Xu W, Chen G, et al. Binding interaction of quercetin3-b-galactoside and its synthetic derivatives with SARS-CoV 3CL(pro):
structure-activity relationship studies reveal salient pharmacophore
features. Bioorg Med Chem 2006;14(24):8295–306.
Park JY, Yuk HJ, Ryu HW, Lim SH, Kim KS, Park KH, et al. Evaluation of
polyphenols from Broussonetia papyrifera as coronavirus protease inhibitors. J
Enzyme Inhib Med Chem 2017;32(1):504–15.
Bhoj VG, Chen ZJ. Ubiquitylation in innate and adaptive immunity. Nature
2009;458(7237):430–7.
Isaacson MK, Ploegh HL. Ubiquitination, ubiquitin-like modifiers, and
deubiquitination in viral infection. Cell Host Microbe 2009;5(6):559–70.
Mukherjee P, Shah F, Desai P, Avery M. Inhibitors of SARS-3CLpro: virtual
screening, biological evaluation, and molecular dynamics simulation studies. J
Chem Inf Model 2011;51(6):1376–92.
Li W, Moore MJ, Vasilieva N, Sui J, Wong SK, Berne MA, et al. Angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the SARS coronavirus. Nature
2003;426(6965):450–4.
Wen CC, Kuo YH, Jan JT, Liang PH, Wang SY, Liu HG, et al. Specific
plant terpenoids and lignoids possess potent antiviral activities against
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. J Med Chem 2007;50
(17):4087–95.
Ryu YB, Park SJ, Kim YM, Lee JY, Seo WD, Chang JS, et al. SARS-CoV 3CLpro
inhibitory effects of quinone-methide triterpenes from Tripterygium regelii.
Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2010;20(6):1873–6.
Park JY, Kim JH, Kim YM, Jeong HJ, Kim DW, Park KH, et al. Tanshinones as
selective and slow-binding inhibitors for SARS-CoV cysteine proteases. Bioorg
Med Chem 2012;20(19):5928–35.
Park JY, Kim JH, Kwon JM, Kwon HJ, Jeong HJ, Kim YM, et al. Dieckol, a SARSCoV 3CL(pro) inhibitor, isolated from the edible brown algae Ecklonia cava.
Bioorg Med Chem 2013;21(13):3730–7.
Song YH, Kim DW, Curtis-Long MJ, Yuk HJ, Wang Y, Zhuang N, et al. Papain-like
protease (PLpro) inhibitory effects of cinnamic amides from Tribulus terrestris
fruits. Biol Pharm Bull 2014;37(6):1021–8.
Park JY, Ko JA, Kim DW, Kim YM, Kwon HJ, Jeong HJ, et al. Chalcones isolated
from Angelica keiskei inhibit cysteine proteases of SARS-CoV. J Enzyme Inhib
Med Chem 2016;31(1):23–30.
Shen L, Niu J, Wang C, Huang B, Wang W, Zhu N, et al. High-throughput
screening and identification of potent broad-spectrum inhibitors of
coronaviruses. J Virol 2019;93(12):e00023–e119.
Zhou P, Yang XL, Wang XG, Hu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, et al. A pneumonia
outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature
2020 [Epub ahead of print].
Tian HY. 2019-nCoV: new challenges from coronavirus. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi
Xue Za Zhi 2020;54:E001 [Chinese with abstract in English].
Hu W, Fu W, Wei X, Yang Y, Lu C, Liu Z. A network pharmacology study on the
active ingredients and potential targets of Tripterygium wilfordii Hook for
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med
2019;2019:5276865.
Rizvi SM, Shakil S, Haneef M. A simple click by click protocol to perform
docking: AutoDock 4.2 made easy for non-bioinformaticians. EXCLI J
2013;12:831–57.
Kim JY, Kim YI, Park SJ, Kim IK, Choi YK, Kim SH. Safe, high-throughput
screening of natural compounds of MERS-CoV entry inhibitors using a
pseudovirus expressing MERS-CoV spike protein. Int J Antimicrob Agents
2018;52(5):730–2.
Ratia K, Saikatendu KS, Santarsiero BD, Barretto N, Baker SC, Stevens RC, et al.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus papain-like protease:
structure of a viral deubiquitinating enzyme. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2006;103(15):5717–22.
Anand K, Ziebuhr J, Wadhwani P, Mesters JR, Hilgenfeld R. Coronavirus main
proteinase (3CLpro) structure: basis for design of anti-SARS drugs. Science
2003;300(5626):1763–7.
Xu Y, Lou Z, Liu Y, Pang H, Tien P, Gao GF, et al. Crystal structure of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike protein fusion core. J Biol Chem
2004;279(47):49414–9.
Zhang W, Huai Y, Miao Z, Qian A, Wang Y. Systems pharmacology for
investigation of the mechanisms of action of traditional Chinese medicine in
drug discovery. Front Pharmacol 2019;10:743.

