Increased Detection of Viruses in Children with
Respiratory Tract Infection Using PCR
Chien-Yu Lin 1,2,† , David Hwang 3,† , Nan-Chang Chiu 2,3,4 , Li-Chuan Weng 5 , Hsin-Fu Liu 5 ,
Jung-Jung Mu 6 , Chang-Pan Liu 2,4,5 and Hsin Chi 2,3,4,5, *

Department of Pediatrics, Hsinchu MacKay Memorial Hospital, Hsinchu 30071, Taiwan;
mmhped.lin@gmail.com
Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei City 25160, Taiwan;
ncc88@mmh.org.tw (N.-C.C.); cpliu@mmh.org.tw (C.-P.L.)
Department of Pediatrics, MacKay Children’s Hospital and MacKay Memorial Hospital,
Taipei 10449, Taiwan; Ckdarpay@gmail.com
Department of Medicine, MacKay Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management,
Taipei 11260, Taiwan
Department of Medical Research, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Tamshui, New Taipei City 25160, Taiwan;

Respiratory viruses are a common cause of respiratory tract infection (RTI), particularly
in neonates and children. Rapid and accurate diagnosis of viral infections could improve clinical
outcomes and reduce the use of antibiotics and treatment sessions. Advances in diagnostic technology
contribute to the accurate detection of viruses. We performed a multiplex real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) to investigate the viral etiology in pediatric patients and compared the detection rates
with those determined using traditional antigen tests and virus cultures. Fifteen respiratory viruses
were included in our investigation: respiratory syncytial virus A/B (RSV), influenza virus A (FluA) and
influenza virus B (FluB), human metapneumovirus (MPV), enterovirus (EV), human parainfluenza
virus (PIV) types 1–4, human rhinovirus (RV), human coronavirus OC43, NL63, and 229E, human
adenovirus (ADV), and human bocavirus (Boca). In total, 474 specimens were collected and tested.
Respiratory viruses were detected more frequently by PCR (357, 75.3%) than they were by traditional
tests (229, 49.3%). The leading pathogens were RSV (113, 23.8%), RV (72, 15.2%), PIV3 (53, 11.2%),
FluA (51, 10.8%), and ADV (48, 10.1%). For children younger than 5 years, RSV and RV were
most prevalent; for children older than 5 years, FluA and ADV were the most frequently detected.
Of the specimens, 25.8% (92/357) were coinfected with two or more viruses. RV, Boca, PIV2, FluB,
and PIV4 had higher rates of coinfection; MPV and PIV1 had the lowest rates of coinfection (9.1% and
5.3%). To conclude, the detection power of PCR was better than that of traditional antigen tests and
virus cultures when considering the detection of respiratory viruses. RSV and RV were the leading
viral pathogens identified in the respiratory specimens. One-quarter of the positive specimens were
coinfected with two or more viruses. In the future, further application of PCR may contribute to the
rapid and accurate diagnosis of respiratory viruses and could improve patient outcomes.
Keywords: respiratory virus; polymerase chain reaction; PCR; respiratory syncytial virus; human
metapneumovirus; multiplex quantitative real-time RT-PCR

Respiratory viruses are ubiquitous and cause a large variety of clinical symptoms. Respiratory tract
infection (RTI) is undoubtedly common, and the recognition of a causative pathogen contributes to the
appropriate management [1]. In addition to the well-known respiratory viruses, such as respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) and influenza virus, human metapneumovirus (MPV) was identified in 2001,
followed by the discovery of other respiratory viruses [2,3]. Currently, the disease burden of respiratory
viruses is beyond our knowledge. Respiratory viruses have been detected in more than two-thirds of
children with radiographically confirmed community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) [4]. Similarly, in the
United States, molecular diagnostics revealed viral infection in 43%–67% of pediatric CAP cases [5].
Respiratory viruses also play an important role in adult pneumonia and are detected in 15%–56% of
adult CAP cases [5,6]. Viruses are responsible for the majority of respiratory infectious diseases in
both children and adults, causing a massive disease burden [7,8]. Furthermore, the identification of
causative viruses enables the accurate diagnosis of respiratory infections and prescription of specific
antiviral agents against certain viruses, such as oseltamivir for influenza viruses, and improves
evaluation of the prognosis [9–11]. Recognizing causative viruses can also provide information on the
appropriate infection control measures, which can potentially reduce unnecessary hospital stays and
allow discontinuation of unnecessary antibiotics [12–14]. In summary, respiratory virus infection is
common, and testing for respiratory pathogens can improve understanding of the roles of pathogens
in respiratory diseases and contribute to their better clinical management [15].
A timely and accurate diagnosis of viral infection can be challenging. Rapid antigen tests
are used to detect influenza virus infection worldwide, but there are some concerns regarding the
sensitivity of currently available viral antigen tests [6,15]. Technological advances have improved
the sensitivity, accessibility, and utility of viral diagnostic tools [16]. Molecular assays have been
developed and progressively multiplexed to diagnose a large number of respiratory viruses in a
single assay with excellent sensitivity and specificity [10,17–20]. The importance of molecular-based
diagnostic modalities is currently on the rise, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology is
being increasingly used in the clinic to rapidly diagnose respiratory infections [19]. This study aims to
detect respiratory viruses in children using PCR and to compare the detection power of this technique
against that when using traditional antigen tests and virus cultures. The clinical conditions were
also investigated.
