Inevitable isolation and the change
of stress markers in hemodialysis
patients during the 2015 MERSCoV outbreak in Korea
Yang Gyun Kim1, Haena Moon1, Se-Yun Kim1, Yu-Ho Lee1, Da-Wun Jeong1, Kipyo Kim 1,
Ju Young Moon1, Young-Ki Lee2, Ajin Cho2, Hong-Seock Lee3, Hayne Cho Park4 & Sang-Ho Lee1
During the outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus(MERS-CoV) in 2015, one
hemodialysis patient was infected with MERS-CoV, and the remaining hemodialysis(HD) patients
(n = 83) and medical staff (n = 12) had to undergo dialysis treatment in an isolated environment. This
study was performed to investigate the effects of stress caused by dialysis treatment under isolation.
Plasma samples from the HD patients and medical staff were collected at the time of isolation(M0),
the following month(M1), and three months after isolation(M3). Parameters for stress included
circulating cell-free genomic DNA(ccf-gDNA), circulating cell-free mitochondria DNA(ccf-mtDNA), and
pentraxin-3(PTX-3). Decreased values of Hct, kt/v and ca x p were recovered after the end of two weeks
of isolation. The levels of ccf-gDNA and ccf-mtDNA were the highest at M0 and decreased gradually in
both HD patients and the medical staff. The normalization of ccf-gDNA and ccf-mtDNA was significantly
delayed in HD patients compared with the response in the medical staff. PTX-3 increased only in HD
patients and was highest at M0, and it then gradually decreased. Medical isolation and subnormal
quality of care during the MERS outbreak caused extreme stress in HD patients. Plasma cell-free DNA
and PTX-3 seems to be good indicators of stress and quality of care in HD patients.
The HD unit was the principal location for the propagation of MERS infections in 2013 in Saudi Arabia1. One
patient on maintenance hemodialysis (HD) in our hospital was infected with Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV) during the outbreak of MERS in Korea. The 83 HD patients and 12 medical staff
were exposed to the MERS patient. Facing the possibility of a large epidemic, we had to follow the guidelines by
National Disaster Management; thus, we decided to quarantine all exposed HD patients and medical staff in the
hospital or their home. The medical staff caring for those patients had to wear level D personal protection equipment during work and were isolated in their homes after work2. Patients who were quarantined irrespective of
their wishes suffered from isolation and fear of infection. Fortunately, no additional patients were infected with
MERS-CoV, but all HD patients and medical staff experienced extreme physical and mental stress for the 17 days
of isolation.
Circulating cell-free DNA (circulating-cfDNA) is released from damaged cells and associated with
various pathological conditions3,4. Previous studies showed physical or emotional stress could augment
circulating-cfDNA5,6. Also, circulating-cfDNA was a predictor of mortality and showed a close association with
chronic inflammation in HD patients7,8. Pentraxin-3 (PTX-3) is a marker of systemic inflammation producing
rapidly by various cells under the inflammation or stress conditions9. These three parameters are commonly used
as stress parameters in pathologic status.
We thought sudden isolation could lead to severe stress and influence the clinical outcome of HD patients. So,
the clinical data and serum sample was collected in the beginning and middle of the isolation period and a long
time after isolation. This study was designed to confirm our hypothesis that MERS isolation could affect not only
clinico-laboratory findings but also various stress markers including circulating cf-DNA and PTX-3.
