Insights into the Recent 2019 Novel Coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) in Light of Past Human
Coronavirus Outbreaks
Hossam M. Ashour 1,2, *, Walid F. Elkhatib 3,4 , Md. Masudur Rahman 5
Hatem A. Elshabrawy 6, *


Department of Biological Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, University of South Florida St. Petersburg,
St. Petersburg, FL 33701, USA
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Cairo 11562, Egypt
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Industries, Badr
University in Cairo (BUC), Entertainment Area, Badr City, Cairo 11829, Egypt; walid2005faisal@yahoo.com
Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams University, African Union
Organization St., Abbassia, Cairo 11566, Egypt
Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary, Animal and Biomedical Sciences, Sylhet Agricultural
University, Sylhet 3100, Bangladesh; rahmanmm.dpp@sau.ac.bd
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Osteopathic Medicine, Sam Houston State
University, Conroe, TX 77304, USA
Correspondence: hossamking@mailcity.com (H.M.A.); hatem.elshabrawy@shsu.edu (H.A.E.)


Coronaviruses (CoVs) are RNA viruses that have become a major public health concern
since the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-CoV (SARS-CoV) outbreak in 2002. The continuous
evolution of coronaviruses was further highlighted with the emergence of the Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome-CoV (MERS-CoV) outbreak in 2012. Currently, the world is concerned about the 2019
novel CoV (SARS-CoV-2) that was initially identified in the city of Wuhan, China in December 2019.
Patients presented with severe viral pneumonia and respiratory illness. The number of cases has
been mounting since then. As of late February 2020, tens of thousands of cases and several thousand
deaths have been reported in China alone, in addition to thousands of cases in other countries.
Although the fatality rate of SARS-CoV-2 is currently lower than SARS-CoV, the virus seems to be
highly contagious based on the number of infected cases to date. In this review, we discuss structure,
genome organization, entry of CoVs into target cells, and provide insights into past and present
outbreaks. The future of human CoV outbreaks will not only depend on how the viruses will evolve,
but will also depend on how we develop efficient prevention and treatment strategies to deal with
this continuous threat.
Keywords: 2019-nCoV; SARS-CoV-2; SARS; MERS; COVID-19

Coronaviruses (CoVs) were discovered in the 1960s and they were classified under family
Coronaviridae, which is the largest family within the order Nidovirales (Figure 1) [1]. Family
Coronaviridae encompasses two subfamilies: subfamily Orthocoronavirinae and subfamily Torovirinae
(Figure 1) [1]. Subfamily Orthocoronavirinae includes four genera: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus,
gammacoronavirus, and deltacoronavirus (Figure 1) [1]. CoVs are typically harbored in mammals and
birds and are common in camels, cattle, cats, bats, and other animals [2]. Alpha and betacoronaviruses
circulate in mammals, including bats (Figure 1) [2]. Gammacoronaviruses mostly infect avian species
infect avian species and a few mammalian species, whereas deltacoronaviruses infect birds and
mammals (Figure 1) [2]. 