Lessons learned from the 2019-nCoV epidemic on prevention of future
infectious diseases
Xingchen Pan a, David M. Ojcius b, Tianyue Gao c, Zhongsheng Li d, Chunhua Pan e, *,
Chungen Pan d, **
Department of Human Resources, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of the Paciﬁc, School of Dentistry, San Francisco, USA
Earl Haig Secondary School, North York, Ontario, Canada
Guangdong Haid Institute of Animal Husbandry & Veterinary, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Research on the Technology of Pig-breeding and
Pig-disease Prevention, Haid Research Institute, Guangdong Haid Group Co., Ltd, Guangzhou, China
The 1st Ward of the Medical Department, Afﬁliated Cancer Hospital and Institute of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China

Only a month after the outbreak of pneumonia caused by 2019-nCoV, more than forty-thousand people
were infected. This put enormous pressure on the Chinese government, medical healthcare provider, and
the general public, but also made the international community deeply nervous. On the 25th day after the
outbreak, the Chinese government implemented strict trafﬁc restrictions on the area where the 2019nCoV had originateddHubei province, whose capital city is Wuhan. Ten days later, the rate of increase
of cases in Hubei showed a signiﬁcant difference (p ¼ 0.0001) compared with the total rate of increase in
other provinces of China. These preliminary data suggest the effectiveness of a trafﬁc restriction policy
for this pandemic thus far. At the same time, solid ﬁnancial support and improved research ability, along
with network communication technology, also greatly facilitated the application of epidemic prevention
measures. These measures were motivated by the need to provide effective treatment of patients, and
involved consultation with three major groups in policy formulationdpublic health experts, the government, and the general public. It was also aided by media and information technology, as well as
international cooperation. This experience will provide China and other countries with valuable lessons
for quickly coordinating and coping with future public health emergencies.

Keywords:
2019-nCoV
Trafﬁc restriction
Government
Public health emergency

Human history is littered with wars and pandemics, but the
death and fear caused by some pandemics cannot be matched by
any war. The one with the largest number of deaths in recent human history, the Spanish ﬂu caused by the H1N1 inﬂuenza A virus,
had infected 500 million people (almost 1/3 of the world population in 1918 [1]) and killed 25 to 50 million people [2,3]. In the 21st
century, human epidemics caused by viruses have continuously
appeared in the public eye. Among them, the new infectious diseases caused by wild animal coronavirus infections in humans have
attracted the most attention, reminding us that people should be
fully prepared to respond to a larger pandemic that may occur at
any time in the future.
Coronaviruses of wild animal origin have caused 3 serious human infectious diseases in less than 20 years. The ﬁrst infectious
disease was reported in November 2002, in Guangdong Province,
China [4]. While the source of the virus was not identiﬁed yet, this
disease spread quickly, infecting many medical staff. On February
21, 2003, an infected Guangdong doctor travelled to Hong Kong,
leading to spread of the virus globally [5]. Not until March 15, after
the World Health Organization (WHO) received reports of cases
from Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Hanoi, was a global alert on the
disease issued, which was ofﬁcially named “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)" [6]. The pathogen originated from bats [7]
and the intermediate host was the masked palm civet [8]. At the
beginning of the epidemic, the international community lacked
experience for containment of this type of outbreak, and the disease was not ofﬁcially diagnosed until 146 days after the ﬁrst case
appeared [9]. From April to May 2003, the Chinese government
established a comprehensive prevention network, allocated 2
billion yuan to epidemic prevention, built a “Xiaotangshan” temporary hospital, and actively treated patients. Because of the low
coverage by modern communication networks, there was difﬁculty
in communicating information. Nevertheless, the epidemic
response was generally satisfactory [10]. Although interpersonal
transmission of the ﬁrst SARS outbreak (November 2002 to July
2003) was successfully stopped thanks to global cooperation [11],
the worldwide spread of the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) still
caused 8447 cases and 774 deaths in 32 countries [12].
The second infectious disease was Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome caused by MERS-CoV in 2012. It occurred in Saudi Arabia
and spread to other countries including the United States, England,
France, and South Korea. The mortality rate was as high as 34.4%. As
of the end of November 2019, a total of 2468 people had been
infected worldwide [13]. According to research results, this coronavirus originated from bats and was transmitted to humans
through an intermediate host, the camel [14,15].
In 2019, a new type of coronavirus, which is highly homologous
to bat coronavirus, hit China again [16,17]. At the end of December,
some hospitals in Wuhan reported several cases of unexplained
pneumonia in those with a history of South China seafood market
exposure [18,19]. In December 31 the pneumonia cases of unknown
origin were ofﬁcially reported; in early January 2020, market store
owners were evacuated in succession; and Hubei Province began to
investigate the source of the virus. However, after only two weeks,
the number of mysterious pneumonia cases nationwide had
reached 198 by January 18, then reaching 830 by January 23 [20],
and Wuhan immediately began implementing trafﬁc control to
prevent the spread of the disease. The “Level 1 Emergency
Response to major public health emergencies” was implemented,
and comprehensive epidemic prevention began. One week later
(January 30), the ofﬁcial reported number of conﬁrmed domestic
cases had reached 9,692, which exceeded the total number of
previous cases of SARS in the world [21]. On the same day, WHO
announced that 2019-nCOV constitutes a Public Health Emergency
of International Concern (PHEIC) [22], which noted that this elusive
disease is more dangerous than the one in 2003. The Chinese
government also made a series of signiﬁcant responses in a very
short period of time, including the establishment of a leading group
of experts for epidemic response [23], the construction of a number
of temporary hospitals [24e26], the deployment of medical staff
[27], and the implementation of a comprehensive national
epidemic prevention policy [28]. It remains to be seen whether
these measures can quickly control the spread of 2019-nCOV.
The major outbreaks caused by the spread of wild animal viruses across the species barrier have raised important questions for
human society. How do we learn from the experience of China and
the international community in responding to the outbreak? What
preparations can human society make in advance of pandemics,
when faced with a potentially more dangerous pandemic in the
future? This article presents the actions taken by the government,
experts and international parties in response to the two outbreaks
caused by SARS-CoV and 2019-nCoV, and analyzes possible preventive measures in future epidemics through a relationship
diagram.
1. 2020 in crisis
Although the 2019-nCOV epidemic broke out rapidly in early
2020, the Chinese government and experts have responded much
faster than they did to the SARS outbreak e relying on 17 years of
technical and economic experience e and various measures were
therefore consecutively carried out.

As shown in Fig. 1A, the challenges brought to us by the two
epidemics are quite different. By January 30, 2020, the cumulative
number of 2019-nCoV cases in China had exceeded the total
number of previous SARS cases worldwide [29], and many new
cases appeared in only one month. Currently, there are still more
than 3000 new conﬁrmed cases of 2019-nCoV infection daily. As of
the date of this publication, the total number of conﬁrmed domestic cases has risen to 78064 [30]. During this period, the diagnosis, isolation, admission and treatment of patients have become
the biggest challenges that China and the international community
need to face. It is reassuring that the vast majority of cases of 2019nCOV are still concentrated in China, and the number of transmitting countries and regions is currently 28 (Fig. 1B), slightly lower
than the number of countries that reported SARS cases [12,31]. In
addition, no deaths have been reported in any country outside of
China, except for the death of a pneumonia patient in the
Philippines [32] (as of February 9, 2020). Since 2019-nCOV has an
incubation period of 5.3e19 days (average of 5.2 days) [33], the
effects of international trafﬁc control measures in 2020 need to be
further observed.
Meanwhile, the Chinese government is actively responding to
the outbreak (Fig. 1C). On January 24, considering the rapid increase
in the number of cases, China began to build several temporary
hospitals, including “Huoshenshan” and “Leishenshan”, in many
cities of the country. Huoshenshan Hospital was successfully constructed at an astonishing speed, and started to receive patients
within ten days [25]. On January 26, the Chinese government
invested 11.21 billion RMB; after 11 days [34], the investment
increased to 66.74 billion RMB [35] in epidemic prevention and
control funds, and has deployed more than 10,000 medical staff
nationwide to assist Hubei Province [27]. Back in 2003, China built
the Xiaotangshan Temporary Hospital in 6 days [36], with its construction starting as late as 158 days after the ﬁrst case was reported, indicating that the response to the spread of SARS-CoV was
far slower than for 2019-nCoV. Similarly, in the current epidemic,
China implemented main domestic response measures before
WHO’s announcement of the high risk of a global epidemic; while
during SARS, China’s establishment of temporary hospitals and
ﬁnancial support came after WHO’s warning.
The government’s rapid response to the epidemic has beneﬁted
in part from the substantial improvement of the national scientiﬁc
research ability and research equipment, as well as the efﬁcient
communication of research results. As shown in Fig. 1D, the disease
caused by 2019-nCOV was diagnosed 8 days after the ﬁrst cases
appeared [37], the entire virus gene sequence was obtained on the
11th day, the virus nucleic acid diagnostic technology was established on the 14th day [38e40], the live virus was isolated on the
25th day [41], and the study on the intermediate host was reported
on the 39th day [68]. In contrast, the SARS virus was isolated in 125
days [43], the disease was formally diagnosed in 146 days [9], a
virus nucleic acid diagnostic method was established in 151 days
[44,45], and the full gene sequence of the virus was obtained in 160
days [46]. As noted in Fig. 1C, during the 2019-nCoV epidemic, most
of the government’s major epidemic prevention measures were
also implemented quickly after the disease was diagnosed.
The rapid increase in the number of 2019-nCoV cases in a short
period of time has forced society to respond quickly. At present,
2019-nCOV is still spreading rapidly, and the origin of the new virus, transmission modes other than saliva droplets and airborne
transmission, the window period, the contagious period after
clinical recovery, and patient prognosis are unknown e but the
efforts of all parties have begun to bear fruit. In particular, it should
be noted that on January 24, 2020, Hubei Province launched the
most stringent anti-epidemic trafﬁc control measures in human
history, as measured in the number of human individuals affected.