Longitudinal study of humoral immunity to
bovine coronavirus, virus shedding, and
treatment for bovine respiratory disease in
pre-weaned beef calves
Aspen M. Workman1* , Larry A. Kuehn1, Tara G. McDaneld1, Michael L. Clawson1 and John Dustin Loy2
Bovine coronavirus (BCV) is associated with respiratory infections in cattle of all ages; however, a
temporal study to evaluate the effect of BCV immunity on virus shedding and bovine respiratory disease (BRD)
incidence in pre-weaned beef calves has not been reported. Thus, we report here a prospective study in three
herds of crossbred beef calves (n = 817) with endemic BCV.
Serial blood samples for measurement of serum anti-BCV antibody titers and nasal swabs for detection of BCV and
other common viral and bacterial BRD pathogens were collected from all calves or subsets of calves at predetermined
times from birth through weaning. The calves were monitored for BRD and those that developed signs of respiratory
disease were sampled for diagnostic testing. To discover additional risk factors that could have influenced BRD
development, sequence analysis of the BCV strain(s) circulating in each herd, and the prevalence of common
opportunistic bacterial pathogens in the upper respiratory tract of sick and apparently healthy cattle were also
evaluated.
Results: Two hundred forty-eight of the 817 study calves (30.4%) were treated for BRD prior to weaning; 246 of those
were from a single herd involved in two outbreaks of BRD leading to mass treatment of all calves in that group.
Molecular diagnostic testing found BCV and Histophilus somni in nasal swabs taken at the time of BRD treatment.
Between herd analyses revealed anti-BCV serum antibody abundance did not associate with the incidence of BRD or
BCV shedding, though these measurements may have been hindered by the long periods between sample collections.
Analysis of the BCV spike gene hypervariable region revealed four polymorphisms in 15 isolates from the three herds,
making strain variation unlikely to account for differences in treatment rates between herds. Persistent or recurrent
shedding episodes of BCV occurred in some animals treated for BRD.
Conclusion: Co-detection of BCV and H. somni at the time of the disease outbreak suggests that these pathogens
contributed to disease pathogenesis. Developing appropriate control measures for respiratory BCV infections may help
decrease the incidence of pre-weaning BRD. The role of antibodies in protection must still be further defined.
Keywords: Bovine coronavirus, Bovine respiratory disease, Histophilus somni, Molecular epidemiology, Nursing-calf
pneumonia, Summer pneumonia
Bovine respiratory disease (BRD) is the leading cause of
morbidity and mortality for all production classes of
cattle and calves in the U.S., causing losses to the cattle
industry in excess of $1 billion dollars annually [1, 2].
Multiple etiologies, including both viral and bacterial,
contribute to BRD [3]. Those generally accepted to be
important contributors to BRD include the viral pathogens bovine herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1), bovine viral diarrhea
virus types 1 and 2 (BVDV), bovine respiratory syncytial
virus (BRSV) and parainfluenza-3 virus (PI3); and the
bacteria Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteurella multocida, Histophilus somni and Mycoplasma bovis [2, 4].
BRD is frequently initiated by a viral infection that disrupts local defenses and/or causes immune suppression,
allowing opportunistic bacterial pathogens that are in
healthy animals as normal nasophayngeal commensals
to proliferate and infect the lungs [2, 4]. Superimposed
environmental or management related stress (such as
adverse weather, shipping, and commingling) can further
suppress the host immune system, increase pathogen
exposure, and may be important co-requisites in many
BRD outbreaks [4]. Although vaccines and antibiotic
treatments are readily available to prevent and treat
infection caused by common BRD pathogens, the
incidence of disease remains high [5].
In recent years, bovine coronavirus (BCV) has been
implicated as an important contributor to BRD [6].
Although initially described as being associated with calf
diarrhea, BCV has been found to infect the upper and
lower respiratory tract and has been isolated from pneumonic lungs alone or in combination with other respiratory pathogens [7–12]. In addition, results of multiple
studies indicate that groups of cattle with high titers of
serum antibodies to BCV at the time of feedlot entry are
less likely to shed BCV and develop BRD than those
with low anti-BCV serum antibody titers [7, 13–15].
Taken together, it appears that BCV contributes to feedlot BRD, and high titers of serum anti-BCV antibodies
associate with reduced risk of BCV infection and disease.
However, it remains unknown whether the serum antibodies themselves are immune correlates of protection,
or whether they simply reflect prior exposure to the
virus [6].
The relationship between BCV and BRD in preweaned beef calves has not been comprehensively evaluated. Though BCV is frequently detected in nasal swabs
from nursing calves with BRD, subclinical BCV
infections are also common in young dairy calves, even
in the presence of relatively high anti-BCV antibody
titers [16, 17]. These results raise questions about the
association between anti-BCV antibody titers and BCV
shedding with the risk of developing BRD in nursing
dairy calves. Similarly, in a 2014 study, our group
sampled four research herds (n = 890) at predefined
times from birth through their fifth week in the feedlot
[15]. This study revealed that the herds in which BCV
was detected in nasal sections during the pre-weaning
period also had the highest incidence of pre-weaning
BRD; however, nasal swabs were not collected at the
time of treatment to diagnose the pathogens associated
with those pre-weaning BRD cases. This study also
reported that serum anti-BCV antibody abundance did
not correlate with BCV shedding prior to weaning. Thus,
while mounting evidence suggests that anti-BCV
antibodies protect weaned feedlot cattle from BRD associated with BCV infection, the relationship between
humoral immunity to BCV, virus shedding, and the risk
for developing BRD in nursing calves remains unclear.
This represents a major obstacle in the development of
effective control strategies to reduce the impact of
BCV-related respiratory disease in cattle, which is
significant given that there are currently no licensed
BCV vaccines in the United States to aid in the prevention of BRD.
To address this knowledge gap, the present study
serially sampled 817 calves from three herds of beef
cattle from birth through weaning to determine whether
shedding of BCV is associated with BRD and whether
levels of anti-BCV serum antibodies associate with BCV
shedding or BRD incidence in pre-weaned beef calves.
Sequence analysis of the virus strain(s) circulating in
each herd and the prevalence of common opportunistic
bacterial pathogens (M. haemolytica, P. multocida, H.
somni and Mycoplasma bovis) in the upper respiratory
tract of sick and apparently healthy cattle were also evaluated to account for potentially confounding factors that
could influence BRD development in these populations.
