Mapping Viral Susceptibility
Loci in Mice
Annu. Rev. Virol. 2019.6:525-546. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Melissa Kane1 and Tatyana V. Golovkina2
Department of Microbiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA;
email: tgolovki@bsd.uchicago.edu

Keywords:
virus, infection, positional cloning, genes, innate and adaptive immunity

Genetic alleles that contribute to enhanced susceptibility or resistance to
viral infections and virally induced diseases have often been first identified
in mice before humans due to the significant advantages of the murine system for genetic studies. Herein we review multiple discoveries that have revealed significant insights into virus-host interactions, all made using genetic
mapping tools in mice. Factors that have been identified include innate and
adaptive immunity genes that contribute to host defense against pathogenic
viruses such as herpes viruses, flaviviruses, retroviruses, and coronaviruses.
Understanding the genetic mechanisms that affect infectious disease outcomes will aid the development of personalized treatment and preventive
strategies for pathogenic infections.

Host genetics dramatically influence the course of viral infections and virally induced diseases.
The discovery of genetic factors linked to virus susceptibility and/or disease outcome requires the
selection of individuals who exhibit unique responses to infections, such as an unusually rapid or
slow progression of disease, or multiple documented exposures to a virus that result in no disease
phenotype. The study of candidate genes is one strategy that has proven successful for identifying
disease susceptibility loci among such individuals. Another approach is an unbiased one in which
DNA from individuals with opposing phenotypes is subjected to genome-wide association studies
(GWASs) to find a correlation between specific genetic loci and the phenotype under study (1).
GWASs take advantage of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that, on average, occur every
300 nucleotides throughout a person’s genome. Once a linkage is identified, a candidate gene
approach is used to test genes in the vicinity of the critical SNP as responsible for the phenotype.
The expectation is that individuals with opposing phenotypes will have allelic variants of the gene.
If a polymorphism is determined, larger genetic screens are undertaken to verify the linkage.
However, these types of investigations have significant limitations. First, GWASs rarely identify coding alleles, as most variants identified by GWASs are within noncoding sequences and thus
may influence genes located some distance from them. Second, GWASs cannot identify causative
variants, only nonrecombinant loci, which typically contain multiple genes. Of the many loci associated with susceptibility to infectious diseases in humans revealed by GWASs, a large fraction
have been mapped to the major histocompatibility (MHC) locus (2). This finding is not surprising since the highly polymorphic MHC locus contains numerous genes that affect the adaptive
immune response to infections. However, due to the low level of recombination within the generich MHC locus (3), SNP-defined linkages within this region are generally spread over a relatively
wide area (1–2 Mb), making it difficult to definitively identify a candidate gene. Finally, significant difficulties remain in providing functional proof that a candidate gene within a given locus
encodes for a susceptibility factor because it is impossible to conduct such experiments in humans.
The mouse is by far the most commonly used model organism for in vivo viral pathogenesis studies as it allows for reduced complexity through standardized environmental and genetic conditions
and is cost efficient. In addition, the genome sequences of several strains, as well as many speciesspecific immunologic, molecular, and biochemical reagents, are widely available to the research
community, making it easier to map genes in the mouse (4).
Modern mouse genetics began at the turn of the twentieth century with two major contributors,
pet mouse breeder Abbie Lathrop and mammalian geneticist William Castle. Lathrop generated
several mouse colonies that varied in their coat color or tumor susceptibility, thereby generating
many progenitors of currently used mouse stocks. Castle and his students, in particular Clarence
C. Little, recognized the value of homozygous mice for studying inheritance and established the
first inbred strains by brother/sister mating of Lathrop’s mice for over 20 generations (5). Each
mouse within the inbred line is homozygous throughout the genome, and each inbred strain is
also isogenic (genetically identical) because all individuals trace back to a common ancestor. Since
Lathrop’s mice were generated by breeding mice captured in Japan, China, and Europe, all original
inbred strains were a mosaic of Mus musculus domesticus, Mus musculus musculus, and Mus musculus
casteneus, with the largest genetic component derived from M. m. domesticus (6).
Mouse breeders possessed mutant mice even before the onset of modern genetics, and these
mice have been instrumental in the expansion of the discipline. However, since all commonly used
inbred mice were derived from only three subspecies, their genomes are relatively nonpolymorphic (7). The relative lack of genetic polymorphisms in classical inbred strains can be overcome by
breeding these strains with mice from wild-derived strains. These wild-derived strains have been
recently established by inbreeding mice belonging to different species of Mus caught in nature.
These wild mice can be crossed with classical laboratory strains to produce viable and fertile offspring with a large number of polymorphisms of natural origin. In addition, various approaches
have been used to increase the frequency of spontaneous mutations in classical inbred mouse
lines. These approaches include treating male mice with mutagens such as N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea
(ENU) (8), which leads to point mutations, and using transposons such as Sleeping Beauty (9) or
piggyBac (10), which result in the insertion of specific DNA sequences randomly throughout the
genome.
