Novel coronavirus in a 15-day-old neonate with
clinical signs of sepsis, a case report
Mojtaba Kamali Aghdam, Nahid Jafari & Kambiz Eftekhari
To cite this article: Mojtaba Kamali Aghdam, Nahid Jafari & Kambiz Eftekhari (2020): Novel
coronavirus in a 15-day-old neonate with clinical signs of sepsis, a case report, Infectious Diseases,
Novel coronavirus or coronavirus disease (COVID-19) can affect all age groups. The clinical course of the disease in children and infants is milder than in adults. It should be noted that, although typical symptoms may be present in
children, non-specific symptoms could be noted in the neonate. The disease is rare in the neonate, so, its suspicion in this
group can help to make a quick diagnose.
Case report: A 15-day-old neonate was admitted with fever, lethargy, cutaneous mottling, and respiratory distress without
cough. His mother had symptoms of Novel coronavirus. So Reverse-Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) assay
was done for the neonate and showed to be positive. The newborn was isolated and subjected to supportive care.
Antibiotic and antiviral treatment was initiated. Eventually, the baby was discharged in good general condition.
Conclusion: When a newborn presents with non-specific symptoms of infection with an added history of COVID-19 in his/
her parents, it indicates the need for PCR testing for Novel coronavirus.

KEYWORDS:
Neonates
novel coronavirus
COVID-19
sepsis

Coronavirus is one of the most important common
human and animal pathogens [1]. In December 2019,
new coronavirus 2019 (SARS-CoV-2) appeared in China.
It spreaded rapidly in China and worldwide within a
short time [1]. It is now referred to as Coronavirus disease (COVID-19). It is a highly contagious [2]. The disease is secondary to the coronavirus b family; it has
already led to severe epidemics, including SARS-CoV
(Sever Acute Respiratory Syndrome- Corona Virus) and
MERS-CoV (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome- Corona
Virus). The mortality rate of SARS-CoV was about 10%
and MERS-CoV was up to 37%. Over the past two decades, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have resulted in more
than 10,000 deaths [3,4]. Some articles have considered
pregnant women as a high-risk group of COVID- 19 [5].
But the latest data in UptoDate suggest that pregnancy
is not an additional risk factor for the infection, and
the risk of disease, treatment and prognosis is similar
to that of nonpregnants [1]. There is currently no information on foetal maternal or vertical transmission [5].
Although the COVID-19 can affect all age groups, the
disease is usually milder in children than in adults, and
may be accompanied by non-specific symptoms, especially in neonates [6]. The presentation of COVID-19 in
children and neonate can range from asymptomatic
infection to severe respiratory distress [6]. The most
common clinical symptoms include fever, fatigue and
dry cough. Some patients have upper respiratory manifestations such as nasal obstruction, nasal discharge
and sore throat, and others have gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal discomfort, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhoea [6]. So far, no mortality has
been reported in children [7]. The diagnosis of COVID19 is based on the contact, travel history and related
laboratory tests [6]. Symptomatic and supportive measures, including oxygen, are the main treatment for
these patients. Intravenous therapy, correction of water,
electrolyte, acid-base imbalances are extremely important as well [6]. Only three newborns have been
reported with COVID-19 [1,6]. These neonates were
36 h, 5 and 17 days old. Their mothers had COVID-19.
The disease is rare in neonates, so its suspicioncan
help for a quick diagnose.
Our aim is to introduce the case. We want to inform
about the likelihood of COVID-19 infection in infants
presenting with non-specific clinical manifestations of
the disease. Especially in the current epidemic, the disease ought to be suspected.

