Oral Mutian®X stopped faecal feline coronavirus shedding by naturally
infected cats


Diane D. Addiea,⁎,1, Sheryl Curranb, Flora Bellinic, Ben Crowec, Emily Sheehand,
Lesya Ukrainchuke, Nicola Decarof
Maison Zabal, 64470, Etchebar, France
Baker Street Ragdoll Cats, Liverpool, UK
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK
Spinney Lodge Vets, Northampton, UK
Carbon Valley Animal Hospital, 101 W. Grant Ave, Firestone, CO 80520, USA
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari, Strada Provinciale per Casamassima, km 3, 70010, Valenzano (Bari), Bari, Italy

Keywords:
Feline coronavirus (FCoV)
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
Anti-virals
Faecal virus shedding
Itraconazole
Mutian X pills

Feline coronavirus (FCoV) is common among cats living indoors in groups. In about 10% of infected cats, a
potentially lethal disease, feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) occurs. Virus transmission is faecal-oral. Mutian®
Xraphconn (Mutian X) is a product marketed to treat cats with FIP but is also being used to stop virus shedding,
although no clear guidelines exist for its use for this purpose. The aim of this study was to establish the minimum
dose and treatment duration required to ensure viral clearance from the faeces of asymptomatic virus-shedding
cats. In five multicat households, 29 cats naturally infected with FCoV and actively shedding virus in the faeces
were given Mutian X pills. Virus shedding was monitored using reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (RT-qPCR) controlled for faecal inhibitors to ensure sensitivity. Mutian X given orally cleared the
virus in 29 cats; although four cats required a repeated course to finally stop virus shedding. A dose of 4 mg/kg
q24 h for four days was found to be the optimal treatment protocol: 2 mg/kg cleared only 80% of cats. Posttreatment using a sensitive RT-qPCR test was essential to ensure that virus clearance had been achieved, since
failure to clear even one cat can result in re-infection of the others. Records of virus shedding by cats before
treatment provided a retrospective control: significantly more cats stopped shedding virus after Mutian X than
recovered from infection during the control period (p < .00001). This is the first report of the successful
elimination of faecal FCoV shedding in chronically infected cats.

Feline coronavirus (FCoV) is a positive strand RNA virus ubiquitous
in multi-cat environments such as breeding catteries, rescue shelters,
cat sanctuaries and large cats in zoos, but rare in stray and feral cats.
(Addie et al., 2012; Cave et al., 2004). Two FCoV genotypes are currently known: FCoV type I (FCoV-I), which is predominant in the field,
(Addie et al., 2003; Hohdatsu et al., 1992; Li et al., 2019) and FCoV
type II (FCoV-II), which derives from recombination between FCoV-I
and canine coronavirus (Decaro and Buonavoglia, 2008; Herrewegh
et al., 1998; Terada et al., 2014).
FCoV is primarily a pathogen of the gastrointestinal tract of domestic cats, replicating in the intestines and is spread by faecal-oral
transmission from cats that are either persistently or transiently
infected (Addie and Jarrett, 2001; Addie et al., 2003). FCoV infections
are often subclinical, but may result in a number of problematic conditions such as acute and chronic diarrhoea, stunting of kittens or
transient upper respiratory signs in newly infected kittens and cats, and
faecal incontinence in persistently infected carrier cats (Addie and
Jarrett, 1992; Kipar et al., 1998). FCoV RNA was found in five of 14 cats
with chronic caecocolic disease, although it was unclear if FCoV was
the cause of the lesions (Hahn et al., 2017).
Some cats that acquire the infection, typically 7–14% (Addie et al.,
1995) develop feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), until recently considered to be an almost uniformly fatal disease. However, in a major
advance, Pedersen et al. (2019) found recently that FIP can be cured by
the parenteral administration of GS-441524, a novel antiviral nucleoside analogue. While this drug has yet to be licensed for veterinary use,
several products, some specifically described as GS-441524, and others
with proprietary names, are being sold through the internet to cat
guardians who treat their own cats suffering from FIP.
FCoV persists in multicat households by infection and re-infection of
healthy cats by the same, or another, strain of virus and by the development of a persistently infected carrier status in 13% of FCoV-infected
cats which act as reservoirs of infection in a feline population without
developing FIP (Addie et al., 1995; Addie and Jarrett, 2001; Addie
et al., 2003; Herrewegh et al., 1997). There is an urgent need of
methods to prevent cats in high density environments such as breeding
and rescue catteries becoming infected with FCoV. An FIP vaccine is
licensed in some countries, but the first dose is administered at
16 weeks (Gerber et al., 1990) which is too late to protect kittens, that
are usually infected when maternally derived antibody wanes at between five and seven weeks of age (Addie and Jarrett, 1992; Pedersen
et al., 1981). At present, therefore, the major way to prevent FIP is to
prevent exposure to the virus by quarantine and rigorous hygiene. FCoV
transmission is faecal-oral; sharing litter trays with a FCoV shedder and
fomite transmission are the major risk factors for uninfected cats. In dry
indoor environments, FCoV can survive up to seven weeks in fomites
(Scott, 1988).
Another method of control would be to stop the excretion of virus in
the faeces of infected cats by antiviral therapy. Some cat guardians have
considered whether the drugs shown to cure FIP might also stop
asymptomatic FCoV-infected cats shedding virus, thereby preventing
them acting as a source of infection and providing a means to establish
households of cats that are free of the virus. Mutian® X (Nantong
Mutian Biotechnology Co. Ltd. China) is one of those products, it is
formulated in capsules containing nicotinamide mononucleotide,
Crocin I, S-Adenosylmethionine, Silymarin and Mutian X, which is a
novel synthetic adenosine analogue (patent pending in China), exhibiting broad-spectrum activity against RNA viruses (Tony Xue, CEO
of Nantong, personal communication). Nucleoside analogues function
by replacing adenosine, thus terminating replication of the RNA virus
genome. Mutian X is efficacious by the oral route unlike previously
described anti-coronavirus drugs, which must be given by painful injection, often causing severe inflammatory responses (Pedersen et al.,
2019), which is of concern for the development of feline injection site
sarcoma.
Although recombinant feline interferon omega (FeIFNω: Virbagen
Omega, Virbac, France) was previously shown to reduce FCoV shedding, this is the first report to document an anti-viral that stopped the
excretion of FCoV in the faeces of naturally infected cats.
using Mutian X tablets: we worked with her to optimise dose and
duration of treatment for stopping virus shedding.
2.2. Faecal sample origin and preparation
Faecal samples were mailed to the Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
(VDL) at the University of Glasgow, UK. The samples were mailed using
Royal Mail or FedEx: they were not on ice, nor in RNA-preserving
buffer. Cat guardians were advised to try to submit faecal samples with
no cat litter attached, since cat litter can inhibit the PCR reaction.
2.3. FCoV reverse-transcriptase quantitative polymerase chain reaction
FCoV RNA was detected by semi-quantitative reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) as previously described (Dunbar
et al., 2019), except that to control for false negative results GAPDH
was replaced by a control for PCR inhibitors in faecal samples, the exact
nature of this control cannot be revealed because the laboratory deems
it a commercial secret. Testing was performed in duplicate. Those
performing the FCoV RT-qPCR tests were blinded to which treatments
the cats were receiving. Threshold cycle (CT) number was used as the
measure of viral load. The lower the CT, the more virus present in the
sample. Samples with no signal at CT 40 were considered negative.
2.4. Treatment protocols
Cat guardians purchased Mutian X online. Mutian X was available in
either tablet format, containing 4 mg of the anti-viral Mutian X ingredient, or capsules (Mutian X 200) containing 10 mg. The exact
nature of Mutian X is a commercial secret, prior to Chinese patent being
granted: the manufacturer describes it as an adenosine nucleoside
analogue (Tony Xue, personal communication).
Cat guardians were using 4 mg/kg q24 hours per os for seven days
as per advice from social media groups for stopping FCoV shedding. The
owner of Household C (SC) was experimenting with different doses and
protocols with the aim of minimising dose and duration of treatment to
stop faecal virus shedding: we report the outcome of using 2 mg/kg and
4 mg/kg doses. The owners of Household E (FB and BC) set up a camera
and alarm system which enabled the recording of the exact number of
hours post onset of treatment that a faecal sample was passed, and to
ensure the samples were not contaminated or degraded.
Prior to the use of Mutian X, cat guardians were attempting to
prevent FCoV transmission within their households by quarantining FIP
cats (Households A and D), keeping cats in as small groups as possible
given their facilities (Households C and E), and using Dr. Elsey Cat
Attract cat litter (Addie et al., 2019) or other bentonite-based cat litter
(Households A and E respectively). Some households also tried to reduce FCoV shedding using probiotics, recombinant FeIFNω, and a
21 day course of itraconazole (Households A and D) which has been
shown to have in vitro activity against Type I FCoV (Takano et al.,
2019). These various treatments were grouped into a single control
period for each Household (Figs. 1–3), since numbers of cats for each of
these parameters were too small to be statistically significant, and also
because combinations of prevention strategies were used.

