Out-of-Hospital Cohort Treatment of
Coronavirus Disease 2019 Patients
with Mild Symptoms in Korea:
an Experience from a Single
Community Treatment Center
Peong Gang Park ,1 Chang Hyup Kim ,2 Yoon Heo ,3 Tae Suk Kim ,4
Chan Woo Park ,5 and Choong-Hyo Kim 6
Ministry of Health and Welfare, Sejong, Korea
Department of Internal Medicine, Kangwon National University Hospital, Chuncheon, Korea
Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Kangwon National University Hospital, Chuncheon, Korea
Department of Internal Medicine, Kangwon National University School of Medicine, Chuncheon, Korea
Department of Emergency Medicine, Kangwon National University School of Medicine, Chuncheon, Korea
Department of Neurosurgery, Kangwon National University School of Medicine, Chuncheon, Korea


The outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused a worldwide pandemic. Less
than 6 weeks after the first confirmed cases in Korea, the patient number exceeded 5,000,
which overcrowded limited hospital resources and forced confirmed patients to stay at home.
To allocate medical resources efficiently, Korea implemented a novel institution for the
purpose of treating patients with cohort isolation out of hospital, namely the Community
Treatment Center (CTC). Herein, we report results of the initial management of patients at
one of the largest CTC in Korea. A total of 309 patients were admitted to our CTC. During the
first two weeks, 7 patients were transferred to the hospital because of symptom aggravation
and 107 patients were discharged without any complication. Although it is a novel concept
and may have some limitations, CTC may be a very cost-effective and resource-saving strategy
in managing massive cases of COVID-19 or other emerging infectious diseases.
Keywords: Community Treatment Center; Medical Resources; SARS-CoV-2; COVID-19

The outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), which originated in Wuhan,
China and is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2),
progressed worldwide with more than 200,000 confirmed cases.1 World Health Organization
characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic on March 11, and it is currently spreading
exponentially among many countries.1 To prevent the transmission of emerging infectious
disease, it is optimal to treat all confirmed patients in a negative pressure isolation room
inside a hospital, as was the case of the Middle East respiratory syndrome outbreak in
South Korea in 2015.2 However, medical resources, such as hospital beds, are not available
indefinitely and often act as an impediment to managing a pandemic of an emerging
infectious disease. Especially patients with severe symptoms, who need oxygen treatment
or an invasive ventilator, must be admitted and treated in the hospital. However, if patients
1/6
with mild symptoms are already occupying the hospital for the purpose of preventing disease
transmission, patients with severe symptoms may not receive proper treatment.
In Korea, the first confirmed cases were identified on January 20. For the first 4 weeks after
the initial outbreak, the disease spread slowly with less than 100 confirmed cases, with all
the confirmed patients being admitted to negative pressure isolation rooms in hospitals.3
However, the number of patients rapidly surged after that, exceeding 5,000 within 6 weeks,
most of them in the Daegu and Gyeongbuk regions. This surge overcrowded regional hospital
resources and forced some confirmed patients to stay at home.3,4 There was even a report
of an out-of-hospital death on February 27 of a patient with confirmed COVID-19 infection
awaiting admission due to shortage of hospital resources.
To allocate medical resources efficiently, a novel institution with the purpose of treating
patients with cohort isolation out of the hospital, namely the Community Treatment Center
(CTC), was designed and implemented in Korea. The CTC is an independent building
outside a hospital based on the concept that patients with mild symptoms do not require
advanced medical resources, although they require isolation to prevent transmission and
active surveillance in case they develop more severe symptoms. Utilizing CTCs has several
advantages compared to isolating patients at home: strict isolation with active surveillance
of patients is possible; it also lowers the risk associated with collecting viral specimens
and the possibility of cross-infections. As of March 18, a total of 12 CTCs are operating in
Korea, and more CTCs in other regions are preparing to open shortly. Herein, we report
the initial management and treatment results of patients at Gyeongbuk-Daegu 7 CTC, one
of the largest CTCs in Korea. The building currently being utilized as Gyeongbuk-Daegu 7
CTC, located in Gumi, Gyeongbuk, was previously a dormitory building owned by a private
company and is now renovated as a CTC. Healthcare providers currently working at the
center consist of 7 physicians, 5 nurses and 1 radiologic technician from Kangwon National
University Hospital; 7 public health doctors from the Ministry of Health and Welfare; and
volunteer healthcare providers (12 nurses and 12 nursing assistants). Physicians worked
on a two-shift system, taking charge of active surveillance of patients and collecting viral
specimens from patients. Nurses worked on a three-shift system and assisted physicians with
such tasks. The clean zone, where healthcare providers work, is separated from the patients'
zone, where patients reside, to prevent cross-infection between healthcare providers and
patients (Fig. 1). Healthcare providers are required to wear personal protective equipment
(PPE) of inner and outer gloves, N95 respirator, goggles, and hooded coveralls when
entering the patients' zone.5 Patients were also instructed to stay in their rooms to prevent
cross-infection between patients. In the patients' zone, two negative pressure rooms for a
mobile radiograph imaging facility and a doctor's office was installed to examine patients
with symptoms of coronavirus. Candidates for CTC admission were confirmed COVID-19
patients with real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) method
and considered by authorities as patients without severe symptoms using guidelines from
the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC).6,7 Exclusion criteria were as
follows: patients with underlying chronic severe medical conditions such as heart failure or
chronic kidney disease and patients with high fever or dyspnea – all of whom likely required
advanced medical treatment. Patients admitted were initially checked for their symptoms
and underlying diseases; patients 55 years of age or older received routine chest radiographs
to rule out asymptomatic pneumonia. After their admission, their body temperature was
monitored twice a day. To minimize access of healthcare providers to the patients' zone and
to communicate more effectively, we encouraged patients to install a specialized mobile
