Peptidoglycan-Associated Cyclic Lipopeptide Disrupts Viral
Infectivity
Bryan A. Johnson,a Adam Hage,a Birte Kalveram,b Megan Mears,b Jessica A. Plante,c,a Sergio E. Rodriguez,a Zhixia Ding,b,e
Xuemei Luo,d,f Dennis Bente,a Shelton S. Bradrick,d Alexander N. Freiberg,b Vsevolod Popov,b,e Ricardo Rajsbaum,a,g
Shannan Rossi,a,b William K. Russell,d,f Vineet D. Menacherya,g
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA
Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA
World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA
UTMB Electron Microscopy Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA
UTMB Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA
Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA

Enteric viruses exploit bacterial components, including lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and peptidoglycan (PG), to facilitate infection in humans. Because of their
origin in the bat enteric system, we wondered if severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (SARS-CoV) or Middle East respiratory syndrome CoV (MERS-CoV) also
use bacterial components to modulate infectivity. To test this question, we incubated CoVs with LPS and PG and evaluated infectivity, ﬁnding no change following
LPS treatment. However, PG from Bacillus subtilis reduced infection ⬎10,000-fold,
while PG from other bacterial species failed to recapitulate this. Treatment with an
alcohol solvent transferred inhibitory activity to the wash, and mass spectrometry revealed surfactin, a cyclic lipopeptide antibiotic, as the inhibitory compound. This antibiotic had robust dose- and temperature-dependent inhibition of CoV infectivity.
Mechanistic studies indicated that surfactin disrupts CoV virion integrity, and surfactin
treatment of the virus inoculum ablated infection in vivo. Finally, similar cyclic lipopeptides had no effect on CoV infectivity, and the inhibitory effect of surfactin extended
broadly to enveloped viruses, including inﬂuenza, Ebola, Zika, Nipah, chikungunya, Una,
Mayaro, Dugbe, and Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever viruses. Overall, our results indicate that peptidoglycan-associated surfactin has broad viricidal activity and suggest that
bacteria by-products may negatively modulate virus infection.

KEYWORDS: MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV, coronavirus, cyclic lipopeptide, microbiome,

charides (LPS) and peptidoglycan (PG) to enhance its thermostability and receptor
afﬁnity, facilitating in vivo infection (3). Antibiotic depletion of commensal bacteria
inhibited oral poliovirus infection, but was rescued by recolonization, pretreatment of
virus with LPS, or bypassing the enteric system through intraperitoneal injection (3).
Other viruses, including reovirus, mouse mammary tumor virus, and murine norovirus,
have been shown to use similar mechanisms to facilitate infection (3, 4). Together, these
results indicate a key role for commensal bacteria in improving infectivity and pathogenesis of enteric viruses.
Like the enteric system, the respiratory tract harbors high levels of commensal
bacteria, particularly in the upper respiratory tract, including the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, and oropharynx (1). While poorly understood, the respiratory microbiome is
complex, with differentiated bacterial communities inhabiting each niche (1). Like the
enteric version, the respiratory microbiome plays a protective role in immunity (1).
Nevertheless, a recent study demonstrated that inﬂuenza can interact with several
pathogenic bacterial infections, increasing their adherence to respiratory cells and
increasing bacterial colonization and disease in vivo (5). These results provide evidence
that viral pathogens can interact with bacteria in the respiratory tract as well as in
the gut.
Although they are human pathogens, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) have their
evolutionary origins in the bat enteric system (6) and may have, like human enteric
viruses, exploited commensal bacteria. Given the high levels of commensals in the
respiratory tract (1), it is possible that such interactions may have been maintained
during emergence of CoV strains. Thus, we wondered if CoVs utilized bacterial components to facilitate infection. Previous work had identiﬁed a key role for the toll-like
receptor (TLR) pathways in immunity to SARS-CoV, with the absence of LPS binding
TLR4 or its downstream adaptors resulting in augmented disease (7–9). Given the
interactions observed between enteric viruses and bacterial components, CoVs may
also use similar microbial components to improve infectivity and subsequently stimulate the TLR4 response.
In this study, we explored the relationship between bacterial surface components
and CoV infection. Surprisingly, we found that PG from Bacillus subtilis reduced CoV
infectivity. Using mass spectrometry, we identiﬁed a cyclic lipopeptide (CLP), surfactin,
as the molecule responsible for CoV inhibition. The inhibitory effect of surfactin was
dose and temperature dependent, with treatment disrupting the integrity of the CoV
particle. Notably, surfactin treatment of the inoculum ablated CoV infection in vivo, but
prophylactic treatment had no effect. Other similar CLPs had no effect on CoV infectivity, suggesting that the viricidal properties of surfactin were unique. Importantly,
surfactin treatment reduced the infectivity of several other enveloped viruses, including
that of inﬂuenza A, Zika, Dugbe, Nipah, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, chikungunya, Mayaro, Una, and Ebola viruses. Together, these results demonstrate the efﬁcacy
of surfactin as a viricidal compound and highlight the potential for microbial environment to modulate virus infection.
(This article was submitted to an online preprint archive [10].)
