Perspectives on therapeutic neutralizing antibodies against the Novel Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2
Guangyu Zhou1,2, Qi Zhao1,2

A newly identified novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) is causing pneumonia-associated respiratory
syndrome across the world. Epidemiology, genomics, and pathogenesis of the SARS-CoV-2 show high
homology with that of SARS-CoV. Current efforts are focusing on development of specific antiviral drugs.
Therapeutic neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) against SARS-CoV-2 will be greatly important therapeutic
agents for the treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Herein, the host immune responses
against SARS-CoV discussed in this review provide implications for developing NAbs and understanding
clinical interventions against SARS-CoV-2. Further, we describe the benefits, challenges and
considerations of NAbs against SARS-CoV-2. Although many challenges exist, NAbs still offer a
therapeutic option to control the current pandemic and the possible re-emergence of the virus in the
future, and their development therefore remains a high priority.

Key words: Neutralizing antibody, SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, severe acute respiratory syndrome

The occurrence of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) cases in Wuhan city, Hubei province of
China firstly emerged in December 2019. A newly
identified novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2, formerly
known as 2019-nCoV) is causing pneumoniaassociated respiratory syndrome [1]. After analysis of
genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 samples obtained
from different infected patients, SARS-CoV-2 shares
high sequence identity with SARS-CoV [2]. Compared
to SARS-CoV, transmitted from human-to-human of
SARS-CoV-2 seems to be greater. As of February 2020,
at least 25 countries reported >70,000 cases of SARSCoV-2 infection. Patients infected with SARS-CoV-2
show typical pneumonia and severe lung damage [3].
COVID-19 can be diagnosed by either clinical CT
radiography or a laboratory real time Reverse
Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR)
[4]. Unfortunately, there are no specific antiviral
drugs or vaccines currently. Several approaches can
be suggested to control infections of SARS-CoV-2,
including
vaccines,
monoclonal
antibodies,
oligonucleotides, peptides, interferon and small-

molecule drugs [5]. The antibody-mediated
humoral response is crucial for preventing viral
infections. A subset of these antibodies, which reduce
viral infectivity by binding to the surface epitopes of
viral particles and thereby blocking the entry of the
virus to an infected cell, are defined as neutralizing
antibodies (NAbs) [6]. NAbs elicit their protective
activities in three main steps. NAbs may prevent the
attachment of the virion to its receptors on targeted
cells, causing aggregation of virus particles. Further,
the viruses are lysed through the constant (C) region of the antibody-mediated 
opsonization or complement activation [7]. This review focuses on understanding immunopathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2
and addressing the benefits, challenges and
considerations of neutralizing antibodies (NAbs).

Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2020, Vol. 16
of SARS-CoV-2 include the spike (S), membrane (M)
and envelop (E) and nucleic capsid (N) proteins [8]. A
coronavirus initiates cell fusion via attachment of the
S protein with the receptor on the host cell surface.
The viral nucleocapsid is delivered inside for
subsequent replication. The S protein comprises two
units, S1 and S2. The receptor-binding domain (RBD)
within S1 directly interacts with host receptors [9].
Structural and functional analysis of the SARS-CoV-2
shows that the SARS-CoV-2 S protein binds the
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor on
human alveolar epithelial cells [10-12], suggesting
SARS-CoV-2 uses the same receptor, ACE2, as
SARS-CoV. However, the SARS-CoV-2 S protein
binds ACE2 with higher affinity than SARS-CoV S
[13]. The high affinity of the S protein for human
ACE2 may lead to the great human-to-human
transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Due to the key role of
the S protein, it is the main target for antibodymediated neutralization.

Innate and adaptive responses of human
to SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV
The clinical spectrum of the outcome of
COVID-19 is highly variable, from mild flu-like
symptoms to severe pneumonia. It is critical to take
insights into cellular and humoral responses in
SARS-CoV-2-induced COVID-19 [14]. Elucidation of
SARS-CoV-2 immunopathogenesis is useful for
developing passive antibody therapy, designing
vaccines, and understanding of clinical drug
interventions. However, the systemic landscape of the
immune responses in patients with COVID-19 is
unclear. Because the clinical features and

similarities with SARS-CoV [15], knowledge learned
from SARS-CoV has important implications for
understanding this new coronavirus.
Resistance to SARS-CoV infections is associated
with both innate and adaptive immune responses
[16]. The innate immune response to SARS-CoV has
not been completely defined [17]. Some studies
demonstrated that both macrophage and dendritic
cell (DC) play the important roles for viral destruction
and immune response induction in mucosalassociated lymphoid tissues [18]. Due to homeostasis,
macrophage and DC as vehicles seemed to
disseminate viruses through the efferent lymphatic
system. Meanwhile, activation of DC and macrophage
by SARS-CoV led to excessive pro-inflammatory
cytokine responses [19]. A drastic elevation of
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines was
observed in the tissues and serum of SARS-CoV
patients [20]. The levels of, IFN-γ, IL-1β IL-6, IL-12,
IL-8, MCP-1 and IP-10 are generally enhanced in the
early infection and subsequently reduced in the
recovery stage. Uncontrolled systemic inflammation
(known as cytokine storm) further resulted in illness
severity. The similar symptom of cytokine storm was
observed in SARS-CoV-2 infection. The inflammatory
cytokines and chemokines (IL-1β, IFN-γ, IP-10, and
MCP-1), which may lead to activated T-helper-1 (Th1)
cell responses, were upregulated [21,22]. However,
SARS-CoV-2 patients secreted excessive IL-4 and
IL-10 that may suppress inflammation via T-helper-2
(Th2) [14]. It differs from SARS-CoV infection. Further
studies are necessary to elucidate innate responses in
pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2.
