
Perspectives on monoclonal antibody therapy as potential therapeutic intervention for Coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19)
Balamurugan Shanmugaraj,1,2 Konlavat Siriwattananon,1,2 Kittikhun Wangkanont,3 Waranyoo Phoolcharoen1,2

Last decade witnessed the outbreak of many life-threatening human pathogens including Nipah, Ebola, Chikungunya,
Zika, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), Severe Acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) and more recently novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV or SARS-CoV-2). The disease condition associated with
novel coronavirus, referred to as Coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The emergence of novel coronavirus in 2019 in
Wuhan, China marked the third highly pathogenic coronavirus infecting humans in the 21st century. The continuing
emergence of coronaviruses at regular intervals poses a significant threat to human health and economy. Ironically, even
after a decade of research on coronavirus, still there are no licensed vaccines or therapeutic agents to treat coronavirus
infection which highlights an urgent need to develop effective vaccines or post-exposure prophylaxis to prevent future
epidemics. Several clinical, genetic and epidemiological features of COVID-19 resemble SARS-CoV infection. Hence,
the research advancements on SARS-CoV treatment might help scientific community in quick understanding of this
virus pathogenesis and develop effective therapeutic/prophylactic agents to treat and prevent this infection. Monoclonal antibodies represent the major class of biotherapeutics for passive immunotherapy to fight against viral infection.
The therapeutic potential of monoclonal antibodies has been well recognized in the treatment of many diseases. Here, we
summarize the potential monoclonal antibody based therapeutic intervention for COVID-19 by considering the existing
knowledge on the neutralizing monoclonal antibodies against similar coronaviruses SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. Further
research on COVID-19 pathogenesis could identify appropriate therapeutic targets to develop specific anti-virals against
this newly emerging pathogen.

Key words: Coronavirus; Emerging threat; Monoclonal Antibody, Immunotherapy, Infectious diseases; Viruses; Zoonoses

Introduction

In December 2019, cases of pneumonia of unknown cause
were reported in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China which was later confirmed to be caused by novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.
The clinical condition caused by novel coronavirus is referred
to as COVID-19.1-4 Coronaviruses (CoVs) are a large family
of viruses that are phenotypically and genotypically diverse.
CoVs are enveloped viruses containing single-stranded positive-sense RNA that belongs to Coronaviridae family of the
Orthocoronavirinae subfamily which can cause illness in birds,
mammals and humans. The viral genome is about 27-32 kb,
which encodes for both structural and non-structural proteins.

The structural proteins such as membrane (M), envelope (E)
protein, nucleocapsid (N) protein and spike protein (S) play a
major role in virus entry and virus replication in the host cell.5-8
Two highly pathogenic coronaviruses of zoonotic origin such
as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV were identified earlier which
causes widespread epidemics and fatality in many countries.
SARS-CoV-2 is the third known highly pathogenic human
coronavirus infection in the last two decades after MERS-CoV
and SARS-CoV.3 Although it is believed to be originated from
bats, the exact source of SARS-CoV-2, animal reservoir and
enzootic patterns of transmission still remain uncertain.
10

The COVID-19 symptoms have reportedly ranged from
mild to severe that can ultimately lead to death. The symptoms usually appear 2-14 days after viral exposure which includes fever, cough, shortness of breath and pneumonia. The
severe cases showed respiratory, hepatic, gastrointestinal and
neurological complications that can leads to mortality. The
transmission of COVID-19 is reported to be human-to-human
transmission via., respiratory droplets or direct contact with
the infected patients.1-3,6,9-13 The virus spreads to more than 20
countries within short period and nearly 73,000 infected cases of COVID-19 with a total of 1,870 deaths were reported as
of February 18, 2020. The numbers of infected cases and death
associated with COVID-19 is increasing daily. More number
of infected cases has been reported in China, followed by Singapore, Hong Kong Thailand, Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Malaysia,
Vietnam, Australia, Germany, USA, France, UAE, UK, Canada, Italy, Philippines, India, Spain, Finland, Sweden, Belgium,
Nepal, Sri Lanka, Egypt, and Cambodia.13
Significant efforts have been made to develop therapeutic
interventions against coronavirus infection. Major research
has been focused on identifying anti-viral molecules targeting
the spike protein as it mediates viral entry, and their potential
in inducing host immune responses and eliciting protective
antibody responses in infected individuals. In this review, we
highlight the therapeutic potential of neutralizing antibodies
that showed promising efficacy against SARS-CoV or MERSCoV which might have the potential for the therapy and prophylaxis of SARS-CoV-2.

intervention strategies including vaccines, monoclonal antibodies, peptides, interferon therapies and small-molecule drugs
to combat SARS-CoV-2, it may require several months to test
its efficacy in vitro/in vivo and also it largely depends on the
results of the clinical trials. Even though this virus is newly
identified, the clinical and genetic features showed similarity
with SARS-CoV.3 Their similarities would make it easier to utilize the existing knowledge and adapt the available vaccines or
therapeutic models developed against other coronaviruses to
target the unique aspects of SARS-CoV-2.
Immunotherapy is regarded as an effective method for
clinical treatment of infectious diseases. The use of monoclonal antibodies is a new era in infectious disease prevention
which overcomes many drawbacks associated with serum
therapy and intravenous immunoglobulins preparations in
terms of specificity, purity, low risk of blood-borne pathogen
contamination and safety. Monoclonal antibodies are versatile
class of pharmaceuticals that have been successfully used by
pharmaceutical industry which can provide an efficient therapeutic intervention with a highly specific treatment against
particular disease.20-23 Many monoclonal antibodies against
viruses are developed in recent years and some are in clinical
pipeline.24-26
CoV infection starts with the interaction of receptor binding domain located in the S protein and target receptor on the
host cell surface such as Angiotensin converting enzyme 2
(ACE2) for SARS-CoV and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4) for
MERS-CoV.27 The effective treatment options against SARSCoV-2 can either based on the use of broad-spectrum anti-viral drugs or by using specific therapeutic molecules that can
directly interrupt any stages of the viral lifecycle or the receptor proteins located in the host cell surface to restrain the virus binding thereby blocking the virus attachment and entry.
This can be achieved by using peptidic fusion inhibitors, antiSARS-CoV-2 neutralizing monoclonal antibodies, anti-ACE2
monoclonal antibodies and protease inhibitors. The spike protein present on the viral membrane plays a vital role in virus
entry and is the principal antigenic component responsible for
inducing host immune response.28 Hence, it has been considered as a key target to develop potential effective therapeutics
against coronavirus infection. The receptor-binding motif located in the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of S1 sub-unit of
spike protein interacts with the cell receptor and mediates the
virus attachment with the host cells.29 Similar to SARS-CoV,
SARS-CoV-2 utilizes host receptor, angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2) for its attachment and entry (Figure 1).30-32
Hence the therapies for SARS-CoV can be extrapolated to use
for SARS-CoV-2. The specific neutralizing monoclonal antibodies either against receptor-binding domain (RBD) in spike
protein or specific antibody that binds to ACE2 could effectively block the virus entry (Figure 2). The structure of SARSCoV-2, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV spike protein and monoclonal antibody interaction sites are shown in figures 3, 4, and
5. The protein structure figures were generated by PyMOL.
As both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 uses same host cell surface receptor, potential blocking agents or strategies tested to
prevent SARS entry could be evaluated against SARS-CoV-2.
Coughlin and Prabhakar, (2012) reported a series of human
monoclonal antibodies targeting the RBD region of S protein

Therapeutic Intervention for COVID-19
Neither an effective vaccines nor anti-viral therapeutic
agents have been approved to treat COVID-19 or any other
human CoV infection till date. The current approach to coronavirus disease management focuses on supportive care. Rapid public health interventions with antibodies, anti-virals or
novel vaccine strategies are highly essential to contain the
virus and disease transmission. Passive antibody therapy can
be considered as a way to limit COVID-19 epidemics. Passive immunization of antibody that can recognize epitopic
regions in the foreign virus particle can reduce the virus replication and disease severity. Antibodies for passive immunotherapy can be isolated from the blood of the infected patients
or it can be manufactured in the laboratory. Immunotherapy
by transferring the convalescent sera to infected patients may
be effective in humans in neutralizing the virus and prevent
further infection. Based on the existing evidence and prior
experience in treating other viral infections such as influenza,
SARS, MERS and Ebola, the early administration of convalescent plasma or hyper-immune immunoglobulin from patients
that contains significant antibody titers can likely reduce the
viral load and disease mortality.14-19 However, the key challenges such as availability of sufficient donors, clinical condition, viral kinetics, and host interactions of SARS-CoV-2 needs
to be elucidated before considering convalescent plasma as a
therapeutic option. However, there is an urgent need to consider novel therapies for treating clinically advanced conditions in order to reduce mortality, virus spread and to mitigate
the potential future outbreaks. Although researchers are in
the process of developing specific preventive and therapeutic
11
