Can J Anesth/J Can Anesth
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630-020-01591-x

REVIEW ARTICLE/BRIEF REVIEW

Practical recommendations for critical care and anesthesiology
teams caring for novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) patients
Directives concrètes à l’intention des équipes de soins intensifs et
d’anesthésiologie prenant soin de patients atteints du coronavirus
2019-nCoV
Randy S. Wax, MD, MEd, FRCPC, FCCM . Michael D. Christian, MD, MSc (Public Health),
FRCPC, FCCM
Received: 7 February 2020 / Accepted: 7 February 2020
Ó Canadian Anesthesiologists’ Society 2020

Abstract A global health emergency has been declared by
the World Health Organization as the 2019-nCoV outbreak
spreads across the world, with confirmed patients in
Canada. Patients infected with 2019-nCoV are at risk for
developing respiratory failure and requiring admission to
critical care units. While providing optimal treatment for
these patients, careful execution of infection control
measures is necessary to prevent nosocomial
transmission to other patients and to healthcare workers
providing care. Although the exact mechanisms of
transmission are currently unclear, human-to-human
transmission can occur, and the risk of airborne spread
during aerosol-generating medical procedures remains a
concern in specific circumstances. This paper summarizes
important considerations regarding patient screening,
environmental controls, personal protective equipment,
resuscitation measures (including intubation), and critical
care unit operations planning as we prepare for the
possibility of new imported cases or local outbreaks of
2019-nCoV. Although understanding of the 2019-nCoV

R. S. Wax, MD, MEd, FRCPC, FCCM (&)
Department of Critical Care Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada
e-mail: randy.wax@queensu.ca
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Department of Critical Care Medicine, Lakeridge Health, 1
Hospital Court, Oshawa, ON L1G 2B9, Canada
M. D. Christian, MD, MSc (Public Health), FRCPC, FCCM
London’s Air Ambulance, Royal London Hospital, Barts Health
NHS Trust, London, England, UK

virus is evolving, lessons learned from prior infectious
disease challenges such as Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome will hopefully improve our state of readiness
regardless of the number of cases we eventually manage in
Canada.
Résumé Une urgence sanitaire mondiale a été déclarée
par l’Organisation mondiale de la Santé alors que
l’épidémie de 2019-nCoV se répand dans le monde et
que des cas ont été confirmés au Canada. Les patients
infectés par le 2019-nCoV sont à risque d’insuffisance
respiratoire et peuvent nécessiter une admission à l’unité
de soins intensifs. Lors d’une prise en charge optimale de
ces patients, il est indispensable de prendre soin d’exécuter
rigoureusement les mesures de contrôle des infections afin
de prévenir la transmission nosocomiale aux autres
patients et aux travailleurs de la santé prodiguant les
soins. Bien que les mécanismes précis de transmission ne
soient pas encore connus, la transmission d’humain à
humain peut survenir, et le risque de dissémination
aérienne pendant les interventions médicales générant
des aérosols est préoccupant dans certaines circonstances
spécifiques. Cet article résume des considérations
importantes en ce qui touche au dépistage des patients,
aux contrôles environnementaux, au matériel de protection
personnelle, aux mesures de réanimation (y compris
l’intubation), et à la planification des activités à l’unité
de soins intensifs alors que nous nous préparons à la
possibilité de nouveaux cas importés ou d’éclosions locales
du 2019-nCoV. Bien que la compréhension du virus 2019nCoV continue d’évoluer, nous espérons que les leçons
retenues des éclosions précédentes de maladies
infectieuses telles que le syndrome respiratoire aigu

123

R. S. Wax, M. D. Christian

sévère nous permettront d’améliorer notre degré de
préparation, indépendamment du nombre de cas que
nous traiterons au Canada.
Keyword COVID-19

Overview of the current state
A new coronavirus, 2019-nCoV, has emerged as the cause
of an unusual cluster of viral pneumonia cases in China.1,2
The situation has rapidly evolved into a global health
emergency as declared by the World Health Organization.3
Canada has joined the list of countries with patients
identified as confirmed or suspected active 2019-nCoV
infection in two provinces. Repatriation of Canadian
citizens from China is expected to result in hundreds of
patients requiring quarantine while monitoring for
symptoms and signs of disease.4
This single-strand, positive-sense RNA virus has been
fully sequenced, and appears to be distinct from but related
to other coronaviruses causing Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS-CoV) and Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome (MERS-CoV).2,5 Mechanisms of transmission
are believed to include contact, droplet, and possibly
airborne under certain circumstances based on historical
experiences related to SARS-CoV outbreaks.6–10 The basic
reproduction number (R0) for this infection, given variable
host and environmental factors, is estimated in the initial
outbreak to be between 2.2 and 3.6 (number of cases
generated after exposure to one patient),11 which is similar
to SARS-CoV but higher than MERS-CoV. The case
fatality rate is estimated to be approximately 2% based on
latest reported data,12 less than SARS-CoV (approximately
10%)13 and MERS-CoV (approximately 40%)14 but
significantly higher than the 2009 pH1N1 (0.026%).15
Over 20,000 confirmed cases have been reported
worldwide in 25 countries across multiple continents.16
At the time of writing, there are over 2,500 cases
considered severe, and over 400 reported deaths.12 These
figures are considered by many as gross underestimates of
the disease prevalence and are rapidly changing.
The mean incubation period for this infection is not
known, but ranges reported by the World Health
Organization are from two to ten days, with typical
presentations having incubation periods of four to seven
days before onset of symptoms.1 One published case17
suggests that transmission may be possible during the
asymptomatic period, which could present additional
challenges for control of the outbreak; however, some
controversy has been raised about whether this risk is
real.18 Given the potential for rapid spread of the virus
internationally,19 unprecedented measures have been

123

instituted to try and contain the spread of 2019-nCoV,
including severe restrictions on millions of people in China
and widespread cancellation of international flights in and
out of China.20 Despite likely originating from an animal
source, the virus appears to have ability for sustained
human-to-human transmission.21 Transmission within
healthcare facilities to healthcare workers has been
documented, with the first published deaths reported of
physicians who acquired 2019-nCoV while caring for
infected patients.22,23
In a recent study describing a cohort of 99 patients
infected with 2019-nCoV,24 the average patient age of the
predominantly male cohort was 56 yr, with half of the
patients having some significant chronic co-morbid illness
(e.g., cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease). The most
frequent clinical manifestations included fever, cough, and
shortness of breath; notably, 17% did not have a fever on
presentation. Imaging typically showed changes consistent
with bilateral pneumonia and 17% of patients met criteria
for acute respiratory distress syndrome. Twenty-three
percent of patients required admission to an intensive
care unit (ICU), and the mortality rate was 11% during the
25-day observation period. Thirteen percent of patients
were treated with non-invasive ventilation, 4% required
mechanical ventilation, and 3% required extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation. Importantly, the limited ability to
test the thousands of patients in China with potential (but
mild) infection means the overall denominator and
subsequent calculated rates of any of these consequences
are likely to be over-estimates and thus we expect the final
rates of complications and deaths to be lower.
The risk of respiratory failure requiring critical care
support in patients infected with 2019-nCoV is significant,
so critical care and anesthesiology teams must be prepared
for the arrival and sustained care of patients infected with
2019-nCoV. This paper provides a brief and pragmatic
overview of key recommendations to help provide optimal
care to critically ill patients infected with 2019-nCoV,
while maximizing the safety of healthcare staff, other
patients, and the public.
Screening and preparation for potential cases
Currently, suspicion for infection with 2019-nCoV requires
two elements in the case presentation: presence of fever
and symptoms of respiratory illness, and epidemiological
link to the virus.25 This link may be travel within 14 days
to affected areas, community or nosocomial close contact
within 14 days of illness onset with an ill person having
confirmed or probable 2019-nCoV infection, close contact
with a person having acute respiratory illness and travel to
an affected area within 14 days of illness onset, or
laboratory exposure to 2019-nCoV biological material.

Critical Care and Coronavirus

Based on the latest cohort data, most, but not all patients
present with fever,24 and therefore appropriate infectious
control precautions should be in place even in the absence
of all elements of the case definition (e.g., patient presents
with bilateral pneumonia with no alternate explanation,
recent travel history to an affected area, but no fever).
Although Wuhan City is the epicentre for this virus and
represents a key affected area, many other areas within
China and beyond may have a sufficient virus prevalence to
trigger a potential epidemiological link. Case definitions
are dynamic, and therefore clinicians are strongly urged to
carefully follow updates from public health and infection
control authorities as our understanding of this illness
matures. Nevertheless, a high index of suspicion and
caution is warranted as the lack of an identifiable
epidemiological link, or failure to recognise a link, has
been well documented to lead to cases of unabated disease
transmission.26 As the spread of this virus expands to
different countries, the ability to use travel history as a flag
for potential 2019-nCoV infection may weaken. Once a
few generations of spread have occurred in a new country,
there may not be an obvious travel history link for
individual patients to flag potential risk. If the situation
progresses to more widespread prevalence of the virus, the
trigger for appropriate enhanced isolation and other
infection control precautions may broaden to include
unexplained febrile respiratory illness. Regardless, strict
compliance with routine precautions for febrile respiratory
illness in general should reduce the potential risk posed by
a patient with 2019-nCoV even without a confirmed
diagnosis.
Potential cases requiring critical care support may
present directly to the emergency department from the
community, or through interfacility transfer. In both cases,
routine careful questioning about risk for 2019-nCoV
exposure through screening is critical to ensure appropriate
infection control precautions (including airborne isolation
and personal protective equipment [PPE]) are used to
manage the patient from initial contact with emergency
medical services (EMS), emergency departments, and inpatient units including the ICU. Inaccurate or incomplete
information about potential risk can occur when EMS are
called for patients in medical crisis, or during discussions
about interfacility transfer. If in doubt, patients with febrile
respiratory illness of unknown etiology should be treated
with contact/droplet ± airborne precautions (if undertaking
high-risk procedures) until infection control and public
health staff can provide further clarification about the
history. Front-line staff should be empowered to treat
patients as possible 2019-nCoV cases based on the best
information available, rather than waiting for authorization
to isolate.8 Every emergency department and ICU should
have a plan for a ‘‘ready bed’’ with airborne isolation

capacity where a suspect unwell 2019-nCoV patient can be
placed in immediate isolation. Regional healthcare systems
may want to designate specific hospitals with better
isolation capacity as preferred destinations for EMS and
the public. Telephone or telemedicine screening of patients
to direct to the most appropriate facility may be helpful,
and appropriate screening for 2019-nCoV risk must be
incorporated into EMS call-taking and dispatch.
Infection control precautions: environmental
The Public Health Agency of Canada has released interim
infection control recommendations related to 2019nCoV.27 Although the predominant mechanism of
transmission is thought to be contact/droplet spread
related to respiratory secretions, under circumstances
relevant to critical care and anesthesia clinicians, airborne
transmission may occur. Isolated reports detecting 2019nCoV in stool have also raised concerns about the potential
risk of fecal-oral transmission.28 Risk factors for potential
airborne transmission are dependent on the patient and the
nature of interventions anticipated. Critically ill patients
may have a greater extent of viral shedding, and some
patients may act as ‘‘supershedders’’ with enhanced ability
to transmit. Certain medical interventions, such as bagvalve-mask ventilation, non-invasive ventilation, and
intubation (in spontaneously breathing patients), may
create localized aerosol generation that can allow
airborne transmission to those closely involved in the
procedure.27
Recommendations at present for routine airborne
isolation of stable patients with suspect or confirmed
2019-nCoV infection in addition to contact/droplet
isolation varies between provinces at this time. These
recommendations are based upon relatively limited data on
transmission of this novel virus combined with the intent to
limit the spread of imported cases. As a result, this
guidance may change as more becomes known about the
disease and if local community-based transmission
becomes prevalent.
Because of the potential need for aerosol-generating
medical procedures, the Public Health Agency of Canada
guidelines support placing unwell suspect or confirmed
2019-nCoV patients in airborne isolation.27 These patients
should be immediately isolated in an airborne isolation
room (i.e., single room, negative pressure, frequent air
exchange) if available. In the event an airborne isolation
room is not available, the patient should be placed in a
single room with closed doors. Strategies short of meeting
these airborne isolation standards, such as portable HEPA
filters or negative air flow, can be considered to reduce risk
in a single room. Anterooms with sufficient space to put on
and remove PPE should be available adjacent to airborne

123

R. S. Wax, M. D. Christian

isolation rooms; if not available, makeshift anterooms can
be constructed.
Airflow within hospital wards can dramatically affect
the risk of nosocomial transmission of some coronavirus
strains, such as SARS.29 During the prior SARS outbreak,
hospital engineers were able to create negative airflow
isolation rooms to modify existing hospital systems when
airborne isolation capacity was overwhelmed.30 In some
cases, entire ICUs were converted to negative pressure/
airflow wards rather than individual patient rooms. In such
cases, full airborne/contact/droplet PPE would be worn in
the patient room without independent airborne isolation
(‘‘hot zone’’) that can be removed on exit. Clean N95
masks, gowns, and gloves should be worn in the makeshift
negative pressure ICU outside of patient rooms (‘‘warm
zone’’) because of potential airborne spread of the virus
into adjacent common areas from patient rooms that did not
have airborne isolation capacity. Personal protective
equipment would not be required outside of the ICU
(‘‘cold zone’’). These strategies used during the SARS
experience could be duplicated if necessary when
managing 2019-nCoV surge scenarios, considering local
operational restrictions and capabilities.
Infection control precautions: PPE
Recommended PPE for contact with critically ill patients
with confirmed or suspected 2019-nCoV infection include
fluid-resistant gown, gloves, eye protection, full face shield
and fit-tested N95 respirators (Fig. 1).27 Hair covers or
hoods should also be worn. Longer sleeved gloves are
preferred (if available) to prevent exposure of the wrists
with glove slippage. Alternately, vertical tape strips can be
used to help keep gloves secured to the gown.
Circumferential taping of gloves to the gown, such as
used when wearing chemical PPE, is not necessary and
makes gown and glove removal more challenging. Eye
protection should include protection from side exposure
with side shields or goggles. Full face shields can provide
both eye protection and avoid facial and respirator
contamination. Some disposable shoe covers may
increase the risk of self-contamination during removal of
protection clothing. Shoes worn should be impermeable to
fluids and able to be decontaminated. Staff should wear
operating room scrub suits or full coveralls under the PPE.
Coveralls with an integrated hood may simplify the
underlayer worn in conjunction with PPE, however the
choice of product should be assessed for ease of removal to
avoid contamination during removal. Hand hygiene must
be performed after removing PPE, and in the event of
inadvertent contamination of the hands by touching dirty
surfaces during PPE removal.

123

One area of controversy relates to the use of powered air
purifying respirators (PAPRs) instead of N95 masks for
aerosol-generating procedures.31 Although PAPRs have a
higher protective factor compared with N95 respirators,
there is no definitive evidence that PAPRs reduce the
likelihood of viral transmission in the setting of potential
airborne spread. Nonetheless, PAPRs may be more
comfortable to wear for prolonged resuscitations,
eliminate concerns of unexpected poor N95 respirator fit,
and are less likely to be dislodged when managing an
agitated patient. PAPRs with hoods covering the entire
head and neck (Fig. 2) may also provide additional
protection against contamination compared with the
typical gear worn in conjunction with an N95 mask.32
Given that healthcare workers became infected during
resuscitation of patients with SARS despite wearing N95
masks,10 the use of PAPRs is reasonable for high-risk
resuscitation scenarios performed on patients with
confirmed or suspected 2019-nCoV infection. Objections
to incorporating PAPRs into supported PPE strategies may
include challenges in training clinicians to safely remove
the equipment without contamination, need for explicit
protocols on cleaning of the devices for next use, and
concerns about creating a two-tiered approach to PPE that
excludes some healthcare workers from access to PAPRs.
Considerations regarding decisions on whether or not to
use PAPRs as part of enhanced contact/droplet/airborne
PPE are summarized in Table 1.
Non-invasive oxygenation support and nebulized
medications
In patients with mild respiratory illness due to 2019-nCoV
infection, supplemental oxygen can be provided with usual
delivery devices. During the Toronto SARS outbreak,
humidified oxygen was avoided to reduce potential viral
spread, although appropriate airborne isolation may obviate
this concern. Support of patients prior to being placed in
airborne isolation, or during transport within or between
facilities, may warrant changes in practice to minimize risk
of viral transmission. When wearing nasal prongs, a
surgical mask can be worn by the patient over the prongs
to reduce droplet spread. Should higher oxygen
requirements necessitate use of a mask, non-rebreather
masks with an attached exhalation filter can be used;
however, the infection control efficacy of many mask/filter
units has not been well evaluated, so must not lead to
reduced isolation and PPE practices. High-flow nasal
cannula (HFNC) delivery systems have become much
more frequently used in the years since the SARS outbreak.
Nevertheless, these may cause an increase in the risk of
viral spread through aerosol generation. Although one
recent study suggested that bacterial droplet spread may

Critical Care and Coronavirus

Fig. 1 Example of enhanced droplet/airborne personal protective
equipment for intubation of patient with suspected or confirmed novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) incorporating fit-tested N95 mask.
Healthcare staff preparing to enter a room to intubate a patient with
suspected or confirmed 2019-nCoV. Note use of fluid-resistant gown,
covering of head and neck plus face shield to minimize skin exposure

to droplet contamination. Additional eye protection worn under the
face shield may help to avoid conjunctival exposure from spray
around the shield. Fit-tested N95 mask is worn to protect against
inhalation of airborne virus. Strips of tape securing gloves to the gown
help prevent gloves from slipping during patient care and exposing
wrists to contamination

Fig. 2 Example of enhanced
droplet/airborne personal
protective equipment
incorporating use of powered air
purifying respirator (PAPR) for
intubation of a simulated patient
with 2019-nCoV. Healthcare
staff wearing PAPR blower unit
with incorporated filter on belt
(rear view on left), attached to
full hood with hose. Gown and
gloves used to avoid droplet or
contact contamination. Note
that in this case, a fit-tested N95
respirator is being worn under
the PAPR hood to protect
against inhalation of airborne
viral particles during removal of
personal protective equipment
(PPE), helpful in settings
without appropriate individual
airborne isolation rooms with
anterooms

not be increased with use of HFNC, the potential for viral
transmission was not examined.33 Use of HFNC should be

limited to patients in appropriate airborne isolation.
Nebulization of medications should also be avoided,

123

R. S. Wax, M. D. Christian
Table 1 Considerations in deciding to use powered air purifying respirators vs N95 mask as part of personal protective equipment for novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) patients
Potential advantages of PAPR

Potential disadvantages of PAPR

Higher protection factor

May be more complicated than required for mode of transmission, leading to
greater risk of contamination when removing PAPR

Full facial and head coverage

Higher cost compared with N95 respirators

More comfortable for prolonged resuscitations or transports and Inability to reuse disposable filters between patients, need large supply of
resistance to being accidentally dislodged
filters
Eliminates N95 fit testing concerns (especially for those who
cannot be successfully fit tested because of facial features)

Need explicit procedures for decontamination and recycling of blower units
for next use

No need to maintain supply of variety of N95 respirators to meet Potential compromise of disposable components (e.g., hoods, hoses) through
fit testing requirements
inappropriate attempts to sterilize and reuse if supplies run low, leading to
infection risk
Can be used with facial hair or for staff who cannot be
successfully fit tested

Communication challenges between staff due to fan noise
Need for recurrent training of staff to maintain competence if not frequently
used

PAPR = powered air purifying respirators

particularly outside of airborne isolation, because of the
risk of viral aerosolization and spread. Bronchodilators
should be administered using metered-dose inhalers.
Although some centres that managed patients with
SARS reported safe use of continuous positive airway
pressure/bilevel positive airway pressure (CPAP/BiPAP),34
there are case reports of considerable SARS transmission
risk with the use of BiPAP to many patients over extended
distances.29 In theory, CPAP/BiPAP units with an
exhalation filter could be used to support 2019-nCoV
patients with respiratory failure in appropriate airborne
isolation; however, the high incidence of CPAP/BiPAP
mask leak may render filtration incomplete. The use of
CPAP/BiPAP may increase the risk of delayed
deterioration leading to need for emergent intubation and
increased risk of mistakes in donning PPE due to time
pressures to resuscitate. In general, CPAP/BiPAP should be
avoided in patients with 2019-nCoV and should never be
used outside of appropriate airborne/droplet isolation.
Airway management and ventilatory support
Intubation of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV was
associated with episodes of healthcare worker
transmission. The reasons for this are likely
multifactorial, including high-level viral shedding due to
severity of patient illness, procedures associated with
resuscitation or intubation that may generate aerosols, and
healthcare worker use of PPE (high-risk patient ? high-risk
procedure = higher level of precautions). As a result,
management of patients requiring intubation or
resuscitation warrant specific caution and should be

123

undertaken in an airborne isolation room. All personnel
in the room must be using appropriate airborne/droplet
PPE, including either a fit-tested N95 mask or a PAPR.
Careful planning of this intervention is required. The
procedure should be attempted by the most skilled person
at intubation using a rapid sequence intubation technique,
to optimize first attempt success. Recurrent traffic of people
bringing equipment into the room may increase the risk of
viral transmission. All necessary equipment and
medications should be available in the room at the time
of intubation attempt. The number of personnel in the room
at the time of intubation should be minimized to essential
team members only.
Bag-mask ventilation prior to intubation can generate
aerosols, as can the patient coughing during laryngoscopy.
An exhalation filter should also be present attached to the
resuscitation bag, typically between the mask or
endotracheal tube and the bag. Inadequate sedation can
also place the intubator at risk if the patient becomes
agitated and dislodges PPE. With adequate preoxygenation, bag-mask ventilation can ideally be avoided
before laryngoscopy. Video laryngoscopy should be used,
ideally with a display separate from the blade, to avoid
placing the face of the intubator close to the patient. If a
difficult airway is anticipated, a flexible bronchoscopic
intubation can be performed using a video bronchoscope
with the display away from the patient. Endotracheal tube
placement must be confirmed with end-tidal carbon dioxide
detection. Personal protective equipment, especially
PAPRs, may preclude auscultation to help confirm
correct tube placement. Careful observation of bilateral
chest rise should help ensure correct depth of tube

Critical Care and Coronavirus

placement pending a portable radiograph. Alternately,
ultrasound may be used to assist in determining
endotracheal tube depth.35
Once intubated, lung protective mechanical ventilation
strategies should be used (target tidal volume 6 mLkg-1
predicted body weight, plateau pressure B30 cm H20,
target SaO2 88–95% and pH C 7.25).36 All exhaled gas
from the ventilator should be filtered. Pneumothorax was
noted in some ventilated patients affected with SARS.
Extrapolating to 2019-nCoV infected patients, clinicians
should strongly consider pneumothorax in any ventilated
patient with sudden respiratory deterioration. Given the
potential delay in obtaining a chest x-ray for a patient in
airborne isolation, portable ultrasound may be used to
quickly assist in the diagnosis of a pneumothorax.
Surgical/anesthesia considerations for 2019-nCoV
patients
Unfortunately, the positive pressure airflow environment of
the operating room can create risk of viral spread when
managing a patient infected with 2019-nCoV. Hospitals
should consult with their biomedical engineers to see if any
operating rooms can be converted to negative pressure
environments with airflow changes. High-risk aerosolgenerating procedures, such as intubation, should not be
performed in a positive pressure environment. During the
SARS outbreak, surgical procedures were performed
within airborne isolation ICU rooms, which eliminated
the risk of intra-facility transport and avoided the need to
make environmental modifications in the operating room.37
Use of intravenous anesthesia would be preferred to the use
of a volatile gas anesthetic machine in the ICU
environment, especially given that these patients are not
going to be rapidly recovered and extubated following the
procedure.

Prevention and management of resuscitation crises/
respiratory or cardiac arrest: Protected Code Blue
(PCB)
Patients infected with 2019-nCoV should be monitored for
early signs of respiratory deterioration and intubated
electively rather than emergently. If possible, patients
isolated with 2019-nCoV should be monitored in a critical
care area with airborne isolation and continuous
physiologic monitoring, given that isolation is known to
reduce the frequency of nursing and physician assessment
in a ward environment.38
During the SARS outbreak, the concept of ‘‘Protected
Code Blue’’ was created to distinguish usual resuscitation
from
those requiring
special
procedures and
precautions.39 A demonstration of the PCB procedures
can be found online at http://sars.medtau.org/
simulatedprotectedcodeblue.pps and is discussed in a
presentation at https://emergencymedicinecases.com/
biohazard-preparedness-protected-code-blue/. Once designated as requiring 2019-nCoV isolation, these
procedures should be used to ensure safety of the
responding resuscitation team. Resuscitation should take
place in an airborne isolation room (if possible) given the
need for aerosol-generating medical procedures. All
members of the resuscitation team must be wearing
appropriate airborne/droplet/contact PPE. Given the
greater risk of infection during a dynamic resuscitation,10
use of PAPRs by specially trained resuscitation teams
should be strongly considered. Initial resuscitation efforts
by first responders wearing usual airborne/droplet/contact
PPE to an acute crisis should focus on measures that are
most likely to help the patient and have low risk for viral
transmission (summarized in Table 2). Once the PCB
team has donned PPE and been checked by an infection
control coach, they can enter the room. Team size should
be minimal to avoid unnecessary viral exposure during
resuscitation—i.e., typically four people with designated
roles. Rather than bring an entire resuscitation cart into a

Table 2 Risk consideration for resuscitation procedures during novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Protected Code Blue
Lower risk resuscitation interventions

Higher risk resuscitation interventions more likely to
generate aerosol and/or increase risk of viral transmission to staff

Placement of an oral airway

High-flow nasal cannula

Placement of an oxygen mask with exhalation filter on patient (if available) Bag-mask ventilation
Chest compressions

CPAP/BiPAP

Defibrillation, cardioversion, transcutaneous pacing

Endotracheal intubation/surgical airway

Obtaining intravenous or intraosseous access

Bronchoscopy

Administration of intravenous resuscitation drugs

Gastrointestinal endoscopy

CPAP/BiPAP = continuous positive airway pressure/bilevel positive airway pressure

123

R. S. Wax, M. D. Christian

room, which will present serious challenges for equipment, cart, and supply decontamination, a specialized
cart containing modular packs of equipment can be
considered, with PCB team members bringing in the
necessary defibrillator and packs rather than the cart.
Following resuscitation, team members can exit when
appropriate and should remove PPE under careful
supervision of an infection control coach using a
checklist to avoid self-contamination.

Additional considerations
Critical care services in Canada must remain on high alert
in the coming weeks/month for a rapid increase in the
demand on resources should the containment of 2019nCoV fail. This situation is evolving rapidly. Now is the
time for every hospital and other organization involved in
healthcare delivery to review their protocols and supplies
to be ready for any patient presenting with minimal notice.
Regional, provincial, and federal authorities should be
aware of real-time critical care capacity, including the
number of airborne isolation critical care rooms. Surge
plans to create additional ICU capacity should be reviewed
and refreshed to prepare for the possibility that 2019-nCoV
becomes a true pandemic with substantial spread within
Canada. Cooperation with researchers developing potential
registries can assist with the better understanding of the
nature of this disease in a Canadian context. Our national
history as a centre of excellence for research in critical care
should allow a more rapid evaluation of proposed treatment
strategies. The psychologic effects of perceived risk to
healthcare providers and the public, especially for those
with confirmed or suspected 2019-nCoV infection, cannot
be ignored. Clear and transparent communication from
governments and healthcare facilities to staff and public
will be essential. The Canadian experience with SARS
taught many lessons, and hopefully those lessons will serve
in keeping healthcare workers safe and providing optimal
care to patients infected with 2019-nCoV.
Author contributions Randy S. Wax and Michael D. Christian
contributed to all aspects of this manuscript, including study
conception and design; acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of
data; and drafting the article.
Acknowledgements Considerable thanks to Vagia T. Campbell,
MSc, BHA, RRT for her review and feedback on this manuscript from
her perspective as a biohazard education expert, current healthcare
leader, and as a former front-line healthcare worker infected while
caring for patients during the previous SARS-CoV outbreak in Toronto.
Conflicts of interest
Funding statement

123

None.
None.

Editorial responsibility This submission was handled by Dr.
Hilary P. Grocott, Editor-in-Chief, Canadian Journal of Anesthesia.

References
1. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, et al. Early transmission dynamics in
Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia. N Engl
J Med 2020; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2001316.
2. Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, et al. A novel coronavirus from
patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. N Engl J Med 2020;
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2001017.
3. World Health Organization. Statement on the second meeting of
the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency
Committee regarding the outbreak of novel coronavirus (2019nCoV). Available from URL: https://www.who.int/newsroom/detail/30-01-2020-statement-on-the-second-meeting-of-theinternational-health-regulations-(2005)-emergency-committeeregarding-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov) (accessed February 2020).
4. Government of Canada. Government of Canada evacuating
Canadians from Wuhan, China. Available from URL: https://
www.canada.ca/en/global-affairs/news/2020/02/government-ofcanada-evacuating-canadians-from-wuhan-china.html (accessed
February 2020).
5. Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, et al. Genomic characterisation and
epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus
origins and receptor binding. Lancet 2020; DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30251-8.
6. Yu IT, Li Y, Wong TW, et al. Evidence of airborne transmission of
the severe acute respiratory syndrome virus. N Engl J Med 2004;
350: 1731-9.
7. Scales DC, Green K, Chan AK, et al. Illness in intensive care staff
after brief exposure to severe acute respiratory syndrome. Emerg
Infect Dis 2003; 9: 1205-10.
8. Muller MP, McGeer A. Febrile respiratory illness in the intensive
care unit setting: an infection control perspective. Curr Opin Crit
Care 2006; 12: 37-42.
9. Fowler RA, Lapinsky SE, Hallett D, et al. Critically ill patients
with severe acute respiratory syndrome. JAMA 2003; 290: 36773.
10. Christian MD, Loutfy M, McDonald LC, et al. Possible SARS
coronavirus transmission during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10: 287-93.
11. Zhao S, Lin Q, Ran J, et al. Preliminary estimation of the basic
reproduction number of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in
China, from 2019 to 2020: a data-driven analysis in the early
phase of the outbreak. Int J Infect Dis 2020; DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijid.2020.01.050.
12. World Health Organization. Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV).
WHO Bull 2020 - Data as reported by January 30, 2020.
Available from URL: https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/
coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200130-sitrep-10-ncov.pdf?
sfvrsn=d0b2e480_2 (accessed February 2020).
13. Christian MD, Poutanen SM, Loutfy MR, Muller MP, Low DE.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38:
1420-7.
14. Majumder MS, Rivers C, Lofgren E, Fisman D. Estimation of
MERS-coronavirus reproductive number and case fatality rate for
the Spring 2014 Saudi Arabia outbreak: insights from publicly
available data. PLoS Curr 2014. Available from URL: http://
currents.plos.org/outbreaks/index.html%3Fp=40801.html
(accessed February 2020).

Critical Care and Coronavirus
15. Donaldson LJ, Rutter PD, Ellis BM, et al. Mortality from
pandemic A/H1N1 2009 influenza in England: public health
surveillance study. BMJ 2010; DOI:https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.
b5213 (accessed February 2020).
16. World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus (nCoV 2019)
situation as of 07 February 2020, 10:00 (CET). Available from
URL:
http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.
html#/c88e37cfc43b4ed3baf977d77e4a0667 (accessed February
2020).
17. Rothe C, Schunk M, Sothmann P, et al. Transmission of 2019nCoV infection from an asymptomatic contact in Germany. N
Engl J Med 2020; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc2001468.
18. Kupferschmidt K. Study claiming new coronavirus can be
transmitted by people without symptoms was flawed. Science
(February 3, 2020). Available from URL: https://www.
sciencemag.org/news/2020/02/paper-non-symptomatic-patienttransmitting-coronavirus-wrong (accessed February 2020).
19. Bogoch II, Watts A, Thomas-Bachli A, Huber C, Kraemer MU,
Khan K. Potential for global spread of a novel coronavirus from
China. J Travel Med 2020; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/jtm/
taaa011.
20. Nkengasong J. China’s response to a novel coronavirus stands in
stark contrast to the 2002 SARS outbreak response. Nat Med
2020; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0771-1.
21. Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok KH, et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia
associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-toperson transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet 2020;
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30154-9.
22. Brest M. Wuhan doctor treating coronavirus patients dies after
contracting disease. Washington Examiner. Available from URL:
https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/news/wuhan-doctor-treatingcoronavirus-patients-dies-after-contracting-disease (accessed February 2020).
23. Buckley C. Chinese Doctor, Silenced After Warning of Outbreak,
Dies From Coronavirus. The New York Times. Available from
URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/06/world/asia/chinesedoctor-Li-Wenliang-coronavirus.html (accessed February 2020).
24. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet
2020; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5.
25. Government of Canada. Interim national case definition: novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Available from URL: https://www.
canada.ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-coronavirusinfection/health-professionals/national-case-definition.html (accessed
February 2020).
26. McDonald LC, Simor AE, Su IJ, et al. SARS in healthcare
facilities, Toronto and Taiwan. Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10: 77781.
27. Government of Canada. Infection prevention and control for
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV): interim guidance for acute
healthcare settings. Available from URL: https://www.canada.

28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.
39.

ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-coronavirusinfection/health-professionals/interim-guidance-acute-healthcaresettings.html (accessed Februay 2020).
XINHUANET. Novel coronavirus may spread via digestive
system: experts. | English.news.cn. Available from URL: http://
www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-02/02/c_138749620.htm (accessed February 2020).
Li Y, Huang X, Yu IT, Wong TW, Qian H. Role of air distribution
in SARS transmission during the largest nosocomial outbreak in
Hong Kong. Indoor Air 2005; 15: 83-95.
Loutfy MR, Wallington T, Rutledge T, et al. Hospital preparedness
and SARS. Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10: 771-6.
Novak D. Why, where, and how PAPRs are being used in health
care. In: Institute of Medicine. The Use and Effectiveness of
Powered Air Purifying Respirators in Health Care: Workshop
Summary - 2015. Washington, DC: The National Academies
Press. Available from URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK294225/#_NBK294225_pubdet (accessed February 2020).
Zamora JE, Murdoch J, Simchison B, Day AG. Contamination: a
comparison of 2 personal protective systems. CMAJ 2006; 175:
249-54.
Leung CC, Joynt GM, Gomersall CD, et al. Comparison of highflow nasal cannula versus oxygen face mask for environmental
bacterial contamination in critically ill pneumonia patients: a
randomized controlled crossover trial. J Hosp Infect 2019; 101:
84-7.
Cheung TM, Yam LY, So LK, et al. Effectiveness of noninvasive
positive pressure ventilation in the treatment of acute respiratory
failure in severe acute respiratory syndrome. Chest 2004; 126:
845-50.
Gottlieb M, Holladay D, Burns KM, Nakitende D, Bailitz J.
Ultrasound for airway management: an evidence-based review
for the emergency clinician. Am J Emerg Med 2019; DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2019.12.019.
Fan E, Brodie D, Slutsky AS. Acute respiratory distress
syndrome: advances in diagnosis and treatment. JAMA 2018;
319: 698-710.
Tien HC, Chughtai T, Jogeklar A, Cooper AB, Brenneman F.
Elective and emergency surgery in patients with severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS). Can J Surg 2005; 48: 71-4.
Stelfox HT, Bates DW, Redelmeier DA. Safety of Patients Isolated
for Infection Control. JAMA 2003; 290: 1899-905.
Abrahamson SD, Canzian S, Brunet F. Using simulation for
training and to change protocol during the outbreak of severe
acute respiratory syndrome. Crit Care 2005; DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1186/cc3916.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

123

