Linear Regression Analysis to predict the number of deaths in India
Consultant Endocrinologist. Nightingale Hospital, Kolkata, India
Consultant Pulmonologist. AMRI Hospitals, Kolkata, India
Milan Majumder, Independent Statistician, Pune, India

No valid treatment or preventative strategy has evolved till date to counter the
SARS CoV 2 (Novel Coronavirus) epidemic that originated in China in late 2019 and have since wrought
havoc on millions across the world with illness, socioeconomic recession and death. This analysis was
aimed at tracing a trend related to death counts expected at the 5th and 6th week of the COVID-19 in
India.
Material and methods: Validated database was used to procure global and Indian data related to coronavirus and related outcomes. Multiple regression and linear regression analyses were used interchangeably. Since the week 6 death count data was not correlated signiﬁcantly with any of the chosen
inputs, an auto-regression technique was employed to improve the predictive ability of the regression
model.
Results: A linear regression analysis predicted average week 5 death count to be 211 with a 95% CI: 1.31
e2.60). Similarly, week 6 death count, in spite of a strong correlation with input variables, did not pass
the test of statistical signiﬁcance. Using auto-regression technique and using week 5 death count as input
the linear regression model predicted week 6 death count in India to be 467, while keeping at the back of
our mind the risk of over-estimation by most of the risk-based models.
Conclusion: According to our analysis, if situation continue in present state; projected death rate (n) is
211 and467 at the end of the 5th and 6th week from now, respectively.
© 2020 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
India
Coronavirus
Death rates
Correlation
Regression

The pandemic of COVID-19 (Coronavirus disease 2019) caused
by SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2) has created a havoc on the human civilization. Since, its
appearance in the city of Wuhan (Hebei district) in China, it has
been a relentless march of new cases and deaths [1]. What makes
it more scary is the novel strain of the virus and the unknowns
associated with it [2]. The present strategy has been to prevent
its spread by social isolation and a scientiﬁc overdrive to
manufacture newer rapid diagnostic kits as well as medications
[3e5]. Coronavirus belongs to a family of RNA viruses within the

virus family Coronaviridae, order Nidovirales [6]. Coronaviruses
are divided into three groups depending on the antigenic spikes
produced by different protein structures of the virus (spike,
membrane & nucleocapsid) [7]. The SARS coronavirus falls under
group 2.
The ability of this family of viruses to readily undergo genetic
recombination not only within same group, but also between
group, makes them readily susceptible to natural selection and
changing its nature of virulence [8]. The most striking feature
however, is its ability to freely cross from one species to another.
HCoV 229 E belongs to the group 1 of the coronaviruses family
thought to be responsible for the epidemic of common cold [7].
Transmission from bats to humans is thought to be the initial
transmission process for HCoV 229 E, which had happened
within the last two centuries. However, the two dramatic events-

SARS-CoV (originated from bats and got transmitted from civet
cats) & MERS-CoV (originated from bats and got transmitted
from camels) in 2003 and 2012 respectively brough our focus
back on the coronavirus family [8,9]. The present coronavirus
pandemic is the result of changes in the receptor binding domain
of the spike protein component via natural selection (?in human
host/?in animal vector) resulting in its increased afﬁnity for the
ACE2 receptor site [10]. ]At present we have more than 450000
individuals affected with Cov-2 resulting in more than 12000
deaths worldwide [11]. In India, as the present day statistics
holds, we have around 718 conﬁrmed cases with 13 deaths [12].
Several countries including India have gone into a state of lockdown in order to prevent spread of this deadly virus. With new
rapid-diagnostic kits coming in and trials with potentially helpful
drugs underway, we need a better understanding of the disease
process and what it holds for the near future. With all the CoV-2
related data available through reliable sources, we choose to
assimilate the available data on total infection rates, total deaths,
case fatality rates (CFR), recovery numbers from across the globe
and create a predictive analysis on what we can expect in India in
the coming weeks.
The aim was to identify the top 15 countries i.e. those most
heavily affected and hence could contribute to a substantial quantity of robust data, and compute a predictive model for India. We
thought this was of paramount importance, since it would help
understanding as well as planning for the future course of action.
India has entered week 4. This analysis was aimed at tracing a
trend related to death counts expected at the 5th and 6th week of
the COVID-19 in India.
