Current Medical Science
Current
Medical Science 40(2):2020
DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11596-020-2173-5

40(2):1-4,2020

1

Preliminary Recommendations for Surgical Practice of Neurosurgery
Department in the Central Epidemic Area of 2019 Coronavirus Infection
Yu-tang TAN, Jun-wen WANG, Kai ZHAO, Lin HAN, Hua-qiu ZHANG, Hong-quan NIU, Kai SHU#, Ting LEI#
Department of Neurosurgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430030, China
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2020

Summary: Since December 2019, an outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has
posed significant threats to the public health and life in China. Unlike the other 6 identified
coronaviruses, the SARS-Cov-2 has a high infectious rate, a long incubation period and a variety
of manifestations. In the absence of effective treatments for the virus, it becomes extremely urgent
to develop scientific and standardized proposals for prevention and control of virus transmission.
Hereby we focused on the surgical practice in Neurosurgery Department, Tongji Hospital, Wuhan,
and drafted several recommendations based on the latest relevant guidelines and our experience.
These recommendations have helped us until now to achieve ‘zero infection’ of doctors and nurses
in our department, we would like to share them with other medical staff of neurosurgery to fight
2019-nCoV infection.
Key words: SARS-CoV-2; Neurosurgery; Diagnosis; Treatment; Prevention

1 INTRODUCTION
Since December 2019, several cases of atypical
pneumonia have been reported in Wuhan. On January
2020, a novel coronavirus was identified by the Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) from
the throat swab sample of pneumonia patients, and was
named coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) by World
Health Organization (WHO)[1, 2]. By 28 February 2020,
nearly 78 959 cases of COVID-19 have been confirmed
nationwide with another 2308 cases suspected.
In the last decades, 6 coronavirus species (CoVs)
have shown to be capable of infecting humans as well
as their regular intermediate hosts, such as birds and
mammals. The outbreak of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (SARS) and Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS) in 2012
has revealed the lethality of CoVs when they infect
humans. SARS-CoV-2 is the 7th identified member
of CoVs family[3-5]. Phylogenetic genome sequencing
has shown that SARS-CoV-2 was most closely related
(89.1% similarity) to a group of SARS-like CoVs[6].
Retrospective studies revealed that the typical
clinical manifestations were fever, cough, and dyspnea.
However, a number of patients only presented initially
Yu-tang TAN, E-mail: 5364478@qq.com
#
Corresponding authors, Kai SHU, E-mail: Kshu@tjh.tjmu.
edu.cn; Ting LEI, E-mail: tlei@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn

with gastrointestinal symptoms. Evidence has shown
that human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2
had occurred by close contacts or through virus-laden
aerosols[7, 8]. The incubation period ranged from 3 days
to 14 days[9, 10]. Patients may develop a rapid and serious
dyspnea in a few days after infection. The mortality was
about 3.5% according to the latest government report.
Although WHO suggested that the current
event did not constitute a Public Health Emergency
of International Concern (PHEIC), the COVID-19
situation exerted significant threats to public health and
life in China[11, 12]. Fortunately, the Chinese government
made a rapid and effective response to this situation and
made a great progress in protecting citizens from virus
transmission. Wuhan City became the battlefront to
fight COVID-19, and most doctors devoted themselves
to this white war. Under novel coronavirus pneumonia
situation, regular clinical work in the local hospital was
seriously restricted. Especially, it became much more
challenging to deal with the surgical requests for patients
with central nervous system (CNS) diseases. As the
largest neurosurgical center in Wuhan, Neurosurgery
Department of Tongji Hospital performed surgical
treatments for patients in the epidemic situation. We
carried out some management proposals of the patients
on the basis of conventional treatment guidelines and
clinical experiences. These recommendations have
helped us until now to achieve ‘zero infection’ of
doctors and nurses in our department, we would like to

2
share with other medical staff of neurosurgery to fight
novel coronavirus infection.
2 Recommendations for the management of patients
with CNS diseases
2.1 Preoperative evaluation and management
All patients were first applied to the special fever
clinics in out-patient department. After temperature
test, a careful history query (especially the fever and
cough manifestations in the last 2 weeks) and physical
examination were performed by doctors from both outpatient and neurosurgery departments under strict third
level protection (medical masks, protective goggles
and suit). Surgical indications should be rigorously
evaluated and surgical treatment should be preserved
for patients with emergency condition, such as ruptured
aneurysm and intracranial hemorrhage. Operations
for patients with relatively stable condition should be
postponed, for example, patients with benign brain
tumors. These patients were documented and followedup through phone call.
A pulmonary computed tomography (CT) scan
and nucleic acid sequencing of throat swab were
recommended for preliminary diagnosis of COVID-19

Current Medical Science 40(2):2020

infection before hospitalization. Patients with positive
results were identified to be confirmed cases and patients
with preliminary negative results were considered to be
suspected cases. However, these examinations should
be canceled and a direct emergency surgery should be
performed for patients under life-threating condition.
Patients without immediate life-threating were
transferred to the neurosurgery ward through special
lane to avoid cross infection.
The neurosurgery ward was divided into several
areas: patient rooms were regarded as infected area,
while nurse station and doctor office were considered
to be clean area. Patient rooms were further divided
into two partitions for suspected cases and confirmed
cases. Individual accommodation was recommended
for all patients and rigorous quarantine should be
applied to the confirmed cases. Daily sterilization was
performed for each single room. Doctors and nurses
must take strict third level protection before entering
patient rooms. Regular preoperative neuroimaging
and laboratory examinations were performed after
hospitalization. We must emphasize that a consultation
from anesthesiologists and perioperative nurses was
necessary to decide the date of operation and the intraoperative cooperation strategies (fig. 1).

Fig. 1 Preoperative evaluation and management for patients with CNS diseases under COVID-19 situation

3

Current Medical Science 40(2):2020

2.2 Intraoperative management
As mentioned above, the surgical strategies
were decided preoperatively. Operations should be
performed in special negative pressure suction room.
The operation room was assumed to be polluted/infected
area. On that day of surgery, neurosurgeons performed
strict sterilization and wore third level protection, then
entered the operative room with anesthesiologists and
perioperative nurses for preparation of subsequent
surgical procedures. Meanwhile, patients were applied
to necessary protection by special medical assistant and
then transferred to the waiting room of operative unit,
where the patients were handed over to perioperative
nurses.
After anesthetic intubation, surgical sterilization
was performed by neurosurgeons. All surgical clothes,
surgical kit and surgical shields should be disposable

items. Senior neurosurgeons were preferred to shorten
the operation duration. For complicated operations,
one or two neurosurgeons should be backed up for
rotation. Double surgical gloves were recommended
for neurosurgeons to avoid infection due to glove
ruptures. We suggested that the speed of drilling
should be slowed to reduce skull bone aerosols. All
surgical procedures should be accomplished according
to preoperative strategies to reduce intraoperative
bleeding and to shorten the operation duration.
After the operations were finished, the patients
were transferred to the waiting room of operative
unit, where the special medical assistant took over
and subsequently transferred the patients back to the
neurosurgery ward. All postoperative patients should be
regarded as suspected cases and should be quarantined
for at least 2 weeks (fig. 2).

Fig. 2 Intraoperative management of patients with CNS disease under COVID-19 situation

2.3 Postoperative management
All postoperative patients should be assumed to be
suspected cases and quarantined for at least 2 weeks.
Pulmonary CT scan and nucleic acid sequencing
of throat swab should be repeated at least 3 times
(in 2 weeks) after operation. The conditions of most
postoperative patients of neurosurgery were critical. The
monitoring and ventilator were necessary equipment
for postoperative supportive care. The air ducts of
ventilator should be daily replaced. Nutrition support

was important for maintaining immunological function
and reducing the possibility of virus and bacterial
infection. If the pulmonary CT scan and nucleic acid
sequencing of throat swab were negative for COVID-19
after 2 weeks, the quarantine could be terminated and
patients were transferred to patient rooms of suspected
cases. The recovery patients without COVID-19 would
be transferred to neurosurgery recovery ward located
on another floor.

4

Current Medical Science 40(2):2020

3 CONCLUSIONS
The outbreak of COVID-19 raises great challenges
for medical work. Currently there is a lack of definite
and effective treatment. The medical workers and
public should be cautious in preventing and controlling
the disease. The condition of patients with CNS
emergency diseases is usually critical. As the largest
neurosurgery department in central epidemic area, we
integrate and redistribute the present resources to adapt
the crisis situation. The recommendations above are
drafted on the basis of our clinical experience and the
latest relevant guidelines. We hope these proposals will
be helpful to other neurosurgery staff. The suggestions
and corrections from colleagues will be welcomed.
With all the efforts, I do believe that we will finally
win in this ‘white war’ against COVID-19.
Conflict of Interest Statement
None.

REFERENCES
1

2
3

Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, et al. Epidemiological
and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel
coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive
study. Lancet, 2020,395(10223):507-513
Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, et al. A new coronavirus associated
with human respiratory disease in China. Nature, 2020.
[Epub ahead of print].
Pan X, Ojcius DM, Gao T, et al. Lessons learned from
the 2019-nCoV epidemic on prevention of future
infectious diseases. Microbes Infect, 2020. [Epub ahead

of print].
Sun P, Lu X, Xu C, et al. Understanding of COVID-19
based on current evidence. J Med Virol, 2020. [Epub
ahead of print].
5 Zhao WM, Song SH, Chen ML, et al. The 2019 novel
coronavirus resource. Yi Chuan, 2020,42(2):212-221
6 Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, et al. Genomic characterisation and
epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications
for virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet, 2020,
395(10224):565-574
7 Ralph R, Lew J, Zeng T, et al. 2019-nCoV (Wuhan virus),
a novel Coronavirus: human-to-human transmission,
travel-related cases, and vaccine readiness. J Infect Dev
Ctries, 2020,14(1):3-17
8 Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, et al. Clinical Characteristics of
138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel CoronavirusInfected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA, 2020.
[Epub ahead of print].
9 Lai CC, Shih TP, Ko WC, et al. Severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and coronavirus
disease-2019 (COVID-19): The epidemic and the
challenges. Int J Antimicrob Agents, 2020:105924
10 Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, et al. Correlation of Chest CT
and RT-PCR Testing in Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) in China: A Report of 1014 Cases.
Radiology, 2020:200642
11 Shanmugaraj B, Malla A, Phoolcharoen W.Emergence
of Novel Coronavirus 2019-nCoV: Need for Rapid
Vaccine and Biologics Development. Pathogens,
2020,9(2):148-150
12 Kwok KO, Wong V, Wei VWI, et al. Novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) cases in Hong Kong and implications for
further spread. J Infect, 2020. [Epub ahead of print].
(Received Feb. 29, 2020; revised Mar. 3, 2020)
4

