Journal of Biotechnology 306 (2019) 177–184

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Biotechnology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jbiotec

Preparation of virus-like particle mimetic nanovesicles displaying the S
protein of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus using insect cells
Tatsuya Katoa,b, Yoshihiro Takamia, Vipin Kumar Deoc, Enoch Y. Parka,b,

T

⁎

a

Department of Agriculture, Graduate School of Integrated Science and Technology, Shizuoka University, Ohya 836, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka, Japan
Green Chemistry Research Division, Research Institute of Green Science and Technology, Shizuoka University, Ohya 836, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka, Japan
c
Oﬃce for International Collaborations, Shizuoka University, Ohya 836, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka, Japan
b

A R T I C LE I N FO

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Virus-like particle
Middle East respiratory syndrome
Coronavirus
Silkworm
Vaccine
Bm5 cell

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) ﬁrst emerged in 2012, and over 2000 infections and
800 deaths have been conﬁrmed in 27 countries. However, to date, no commercial vaccine is available. In this
study, structural proteins of MERS-CoV were expressed in silkworm larvae and Bm5 cells for the development of
vaccine candidates against MERS-CoV and diagnostic methods. The spike (S) protein of MERS-CoV lacking its
transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains (SΔTM) was secreted into the hemolymph of silkworm larvae using a
bombyxin signal peptide and puriﬁed using aﬃnity chromatography. The puriﬁed SΔTM forms small nanoparticles as well as the full-length S protein and has the ability to bind human dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4),
which is a receptor of MERS-CoV. These results indicate that bioactive SΔTM was expressed in silkworm larvae.
To produce MERS-CoV-like particles (MERS-CoV-LPs), the coexpression of spike proteins was performed in Bm5
cells and envelope (E) and membrane (M) proteins secreted E and M proteins extracellularly, suggesting that
MERS-CoV-LPs may be formed. However, this S protein was not displayed on virus-like particles (VLPs) even
though E and M proteins were secreted into the culture supernatant. By surfactant treatment and mechanical
extrusion using S protein- or three structural protein-expressing Bm5 cells, S protein-displaying nanovesicles
with diameters of approximately 100-200 nm were prepared and conﬁrmed by immuno-TEM. The mechanical
extrusion method is favorable for obtaining uniform recombinant protein-displaying nanovesicles from cultured
cells. The puriﬁed SΔTM from silkworm larvae and S protein-displaying nanovesicles from Bm5 cells may lead to
the development of nanoparticle-based vaccines against MERS-CoV and the diagnostic detection of MERS-CoV.

1. Introduction
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), which ﬁrst emerged in
Saudi Arabia in 2012, is caused by MERS coronavirus (MERS-CoV).
Over 2000 infections have been conﬁrmed in 27 countries, and 800
deaths have occurred (WHO, 2019). MERS-CoV is a single positivestranded RNA virus and belongs to the group C species of beta-coronavirus (Chan et al., 2012). Bats are the natural reservoir of MERSCoV, and camels are its intermediate host (Memish et al., 2013; Wang
et al., 2014). MERS-CoV may spread to humans through camels and
may be transmitted from human to human (Health Protection Agency
(HPA) and UK Novel Coronavirus Investigation team, 2013).
MERS-CoV contains four structural proteins, the spike (S), envelope,
(E), membrane (M) and nucleocapsid (N) proteins. The S protein, which
is a class I fusion protein, is responsible for viral entry into target cells

through receptor binding. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4, CD26) is
known to be its receptor. During viral infection, S protein is processed
into S1 and S2 subunits. The S1 subunit contains the receptor binding
domain, and the S2 subunit is required for the membrane fusion of
MERS-CoV. Therefore, the S protein is one of the targets for the development of MERS-CoV therapeutics (Du et al., 2017). Some neutralizing antibodies have been developed against the receptor-binding
domain of S protein, which blocks the interaction of S protein with
DDP4, to inhibit the infection of cells by MERS-CoV (Corti et al., 2015;
Jiang et al., 2014). In addition, the S protein and its receptor-binding
domain are regarded as promising targets for the development of vaccines against MERS-CoV, even though no vaccine against MERS-CoV is
yet commercially available (Ma et al., 2014a, b).
The M protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus (SARS-CoV) forms enveloped virus-like particles (VLPs) when

⁎
Corresponding author at: Green Chemistry Research Division, Research Institute of Green Science and Technology, Shizuoka University, Ohya 836, Suruga-ku,
Shizuoka, Japan.
E-mail address: park.enoch@shizuoka.ac.jp (E.Y. Park).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2019.10.007
Received 12 June 2019; Received in revised form 26 September 2019; Accepted 7 October 2019
Available online 12 October 2019
0168-1656/ © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Journal of Biotechnology 306 (2019) 177–184

T. Kato, et al.

5′ 3′

CGCGAATCCATGAAGATACTCCTTGCTATTGCATTAATGTTGTCAACAGTAATGTGGGTGTCAACAGAACAAAAACTCATCTCAGAAGAGGATCTGTATGTGGATGTGGGACCTGAC
GCGGAATTCTTAATGTACGTGCACCTTGTGG
GCGGAATTCCCACTTGTTGTAGTAGGTGTAGTTGC
GCGAATTCATGTTACCCTTTGTCCAAGA
GCAAGCTTTTACTTGTCATCGTCATCCTTGTAGTCAACCCACTCGTCAGGTGGTA
GCGAATTCATGTCTAATATGACGCAACTCACTG
GCAAGCTTCTACACCACATCATCTTCGGCACCTGGCATGGCAACGCCAGCTCGAAGCAATGCAA
GTTTTCCCAGTCACGAC
CAGGAAACAGCTATGAC
AACGCTCTATGGTCTAAAGATTTACTCCGGAATATTAATAG
AAACGTGCAATAGTATCCAGTTTTAGATTTCACTTATCTGG
AAACTGGATACTATTGCACGTTTACTCCGGAATATTAATAG
AAACATCAGGCATCATTAGGTTTTAGATTTCACTTATCTGG
AAACCTAATGATGCCTGATGTTTACTCCGGAATATTAATAG
AAACTAAGCTATGTGAACCGTTTTAGATTTCACTTATCTGG
AAACACTGACATTGACTTGGTTTCCCGGTCCGAAGCGCGCG
AAATCTTTAGACCATAGAGCGTTCTATTAATATTCCGGAGT

Name

Bx-myc-S-F
S-R
SΔTM-R
E-F
E-FLAG-R
M-F
M-R
M13-F
M13-R
α-1-F
β-1-R
β-2-F
γ-2-R
γ-3-F
ω-3-R
ω-pFB-F
α-pFB-R

it is coexpressed with the E or N protein in insect cells and mammalian
cells (Mortola and Roy, 2004; Siu et al., 2008). Likewise, VLPs of MERSCoV (MERS-CoV-LPs) were produced in insect cells by the coexpression
of the S, E and M proteins (Wang et al., 2017). The immunization
Rhesus macaques with S protein-displaying MERS-CoV-LPs induced the
production of receptor-binding domain-speciﬁc antibodies and virusneutralizing antibodies, leading to Th1-mediated immunity. This result
indicates that S protein-displaying VLPs are a promising tool for vaccination against MERS-CoV.
VLPs, which are produced in various expression systems, have been
widely developed as vaccines and carriers in drug and gene delivery
system (Charlton Hume et al., 2019; Rohovie et al., 2017). In addition
to enveloped VLPs, to generate nanovesicles composed of envelope and
some functional proteins, the methods to disrupt cells by a surfactant
and extrusion through membranes have been also developed (Guo
et al., 2018; Mi et al., 2016). Nanovesicles by surfactant treatment or by
mechanical extrusion provide the platforms for the vaccination to infectious diseases and drug delivery as well as VLPs and exosomes. Using
these methods, a recombinant protein-displaying nanovesicles can be
prepared from the cell cultures.
Insect larva and insect cells have been used widely for the production of recombinant proteins including VLPs (Minkner and Park, 2018).
Especially, silkworm larvae and pupae are regarded as a favorable host
for a large-scale production of recombinant proteins because of its ease
to handle, its cost-eﬀectiveness and the capacity of producing proteins
(Fuenmayor et al., 2017). These are advantageous to develop the vaccines against infectious diseases.
In this study, the S protein of MERS-CoV was expressed in silkworm
larvae as a secretory protein and puriﬁed from the hemolymph. In
addition, we explored the generation of MERS-CoV-LPs by the coexpression of the S, E and M proteins in silkworms and Bm5 cells and of
nanovesicles displaying the S protein by subjecting S protein-expressing
cells to surfactant treatment or mechanical extrusion.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Cell cultivation and silkworms
Bm5 cells were maintained at 27 °C in Sf-900II (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc K. K., Tokyo, Japan) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc K. K.) and Antimycotic-Antibiotic
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc K. K.). In addition, Bm5 cells were also cultivated in non-FBS Sf900II medium. Fourth-instar silkworm larvae were
purchased from Ehime Sansyu (Ehime, Japan). Silkworm larvae were
reared on an artiﬁcial diet, Silkmate 2S (Nosan, Yokohama, Japan) at
25 °C.
2.2. Construction of recombinant baculoviruses

Table 1
Primers used.

Genes encoding the E and M proteins (GenBank: KF961222.1) were
synthesized by Genewiz Japan (Saitama, Japan). A gene encoding the S
protein was purchased from Sino Biological (Beijing, China) as a vector
(https://www.sinobiological.com/MERS-CoV-NCoV-Novelcoronavirus-Spike-Protein-Codon-Optimized-ORF-mammalianexpression-plasmid-N-Flag-tag-p212233.html). To connect the tag sequences, genes encoding the E and M proteins were ampliﬁed using the
E and M primer sets (Table 1), respectively. The genes encoding the E
and M proteins had FLAG tag and PA tag sequences at the 3′-end. The
gene encoding the S protein was ampliﬁed by PCR using Bx-myc-S-F
and the S-R primer set (Table 1). The S protein gene had sequences
encoding the bombyxin signal peptide and c-Myc tag instead of that
encoding its native signal peptide. To express SΔTM, which does not
have its native transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains, the gene
encoding SΔTM was ampliﬁed by PCR using the bx-myc-S-F and SΔTMR primer set (Table 1). The gene encoding SΔTM also had the sequence
encoding the bombyxin signal peptide and c-Myc tag instead of that
178

Journal of Biotechnology 306 (2019) 177–184

T. Kato, et al.

Fig. 1. Constructs of structural proteins of MERS-CoV in this study. (A) S proteins constructs expressed in this study. Numbers indicate the amino acid residues in the
S protein. (B) S protein expression cassettes in BmNPV/SΔTM and BmNPV/S bacmids. This recombinant BmNPV allows the expression of both S proteins. (C) The
expression cassette of three structural proteins (S, E and M proteins) in a single recombinant BmNPV/S/E/M bacmid. This recombinant BmNPV allows the coexpression of S protein with its native transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains with E and M proteins.

and α-pFB-R primer set (Table 1). These 4 PCR fragments were assembled simultaneously by the Gibson assembly method (Gibson,
2011). Using the constructed vector containing 3 gene expression cassettes, a recombinant BmNPV/S/E/M bacmid was constructed.

encoding its native signal peptide. The gene encoding the E protein was
ampliﬁed by PCR using the E-F and E-FLAG-R primer set (Table 1). The
gene encoding the M protein was ampliﬁed by PCR using the M-F and
M-PA-R primer set (Table 1). Each ampliﬁed gene was inserted into the
pFastbac1 vector (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc K. K.). Each resulting recombinant plasmid was transformed into Escherichia coli BmDH10Bac
bacmid (Motohashi et al., 2005), and white colonies were selected. A
recombinant BmNPV bacmid (BmNPV/S or BmNPV/SΔTM) containing
each gene was extracted from a white colony, and the insertion of each
gene into the BmNPV bacmid was checked by PCR using the M13-F and
M13-R primer set (Table 1). Each recombinant BmNPV was prepared by
the transfection of each constructed BmNPV bacmid into Bm5 cells. For
transfection, several micrograms of recombinant BmNPV bacmid was
transfected into Bm5 cells with Jet PEI reagent (Polyplus Transfection,
New York, NY, USA). After several days, the culture supernatant was
collected, followed by titer-up. To express recombinant proteins in Bm5
cells, Bm5 cells were infected with recombinant BmNPVs at an M.O.I. of
1. The titers of recombinant BmNPVs were determined by the protocol
described previously (Kato et al., 2009).
To coexpress S, E and M proteins, a recombinant BmNPV/S/E/M
bacmid containing these gene expression cassettes was constructed. The
gene expression cassettes were ampliﬁed by PCR using the α-β primer
set (α-1-F and β-1-R, Table 1), β-γ primer set (β-2-F and γ-2-R, Table 1)
and γ-ω primer set (γ-3-F and ω-3-R, Table 1), respectively (Weissmann
et al., 2016). pFastbac 1, in which the polyhedrin promoter and the
multicloning site were deleted, was ampliﬁed by PCR using the ω-pFB-F

2.3. Preparation of protein extracts and puriﬁcation of SΔTM from
hemolymph
The culture supernatant was separated from Bm5 cells by centrifugation, and the collected Bm5 cells were suspended in phosphatebuﬀered saline (PBS, pH 7.4). Each sample was mixed with 2 × sample
buﬀer containing 2-mercaptoethanol (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan),
followed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE).
A recombinant BmNPV solution was injected into silkworm larvae
to express each structural protein. To purify SΔTM from the hemolymph, the collected hemolymph was centrifuged to remove hemocytes
and insoluble materials, and the supernatant was dialyzed with PBS
overnight. After dialysis, SΔTM was puriﬁed by anti c-Myc antibody
beads (10D11) (FUJIFILM Wako pure chemical). Elution was performed
with 0.1-M glycine-HCl (pH 3.5), and the elution fractions were immediately neutralized with 1.5-M Tris-HCl (pH 7.4).
The protein concentration in each sample was determined using a
Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc).

179

Journal of Biotechnology 306 (2019) 177–184

T. Kato, et al.

Fig. 2. Expression and puriﬁcation of SΔTM in silkworm larvae. (A) Expression of S protein and SΔTM in silkworm larvae. Each expressed proteins in hemolymph
were detected by western blot using a mouse anti-c-Myc monoclonal antibody. (B) Puriﬁcation of SΔTM from hemolymph using aﬃnity chromatography. Puriﬁed
SΔTM was detected by CBB staining and western blotting. (C) TEM image of puriﬁed SΔTM. Proteins were stained with phosphotungstic acid as a negative stain. (D)
ELISA to analyze the binding of puriﬁed SΔTM to its receptor. Human DPP4, human ACE2 and BSA were immobilized onto wells in a 96-well plate. ELISA was
performed according to the protocol described in the Materials and Methods.

Biological) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) were placed on wells in a
96-well plate. The supernatant was removed from the wells, and 2%
skimmed milk in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 (PBST) was added to
each well, followed by incubation of the plate for 1-h. The blocking
solution was removed, and puriﬁed SΔTM was put into each well. After
incubation at room temperature for 1-h, the wells were washed with
PBST 3 times. The monoclonal antibody anti c-Myc (FUJIFILM Wako
Pure Chemical) diluted 1,000-fold was added to each well and incubated at room temperature for 1-h, followed by washing each well 3
times with PBST. Anti-mouse IgG antibody-HRP (GE Healthcare Japan)
diluted 5,000-fold with PBST was added to each well and incubated at
room temperature for 1-h. Each well was washed with TBST followed
by the HRP reaction. One hundred microliters of substrate (0.1-mg/ml
3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine in 100-mM sodium acetate, pH 6.0, with
0.2% (v/v) of 30% hydrogen peroxide) was reacted in each well, and
the plate was incubated for development of the blue coloration at room
temperature. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 50 μl of 1 N
H2SO4 solution, followed by measurement of the absorbance at 450 nm.

2.4. SDS-PAGE and western blot
Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE using 10% or 12% polyacrylamide gel. The gels were then subjected to western blotting.
Proteins were transferred onto a polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF)
membrane using the Mini Trans-Blot Electrophoretic Transfer Cell (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). The blocking step was carried out in 5% skim
milk in Tris-buﬀered saline containing 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST, pH 7.6),
followed by the incubation of the membrane with each primary antibody, namely, mouse anti c-Myc monoclonal antibody (FUJIFILM Wako
Pure Chemical, Osaka, Japan), anti-DDDDK-tag monoclonal antibody
(Medical & Biological Laboratories, Nagoya, Japan) or rat anti-PA tag
monoclonal antibody (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical). Each primary
antibody was diluted 1,000-fold before use. After washing with TBS-T,
the membrane was incubated with each secondary antibody, namely,
10,000-fold-diluted sheep HRP-linked IgG (GE Healthcare Japan,
Tokyo, Japan) or goat anti-rat IgG-HRP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Dallas, USA). Detection based on the HRP reaction was carried out
using Immobilon Western Chemiluminescent HRP Substrate (Merck
Millipore Japan, Tokyo, Japan). Protein bands were detected on a
Fluor-S MAX MultiImager (Bio-Rad).

2.6. Preparation of nanovesicles using surfactant treatment or mechanical
extrusion

2.5. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)

Bm5 cells were infected with a recombinant BmNPV/S, BmNPV/
SΔTM containing the S protein gene expression cassette and BmNPV/S/
T/M containing the S, E and M protein gene expression cassette at an
M.O.I. of 1.0 and cultivated for 4 d. The preparation of nanovesicles by
surfactant treatment (SNVs) was performed according to the protocol

To investigate the binding of the S protein to DPP4, ELISA was
carried out. First, 100-ng of human DPP4 (Sino Biological, Beijing,
China), human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2, Sino
180

Journal of Biotechnology 306 (2019) 177–184

T. Kato, et al.

polycarbonate track-etched membrane disk (GVS Japan K. K., Tokyo
Japan) using a mini-extruder (Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL, USA).
The ﬁltrate was then subjected to sucrose density gradient centrifugation (20-60%), and the S protein-rich fractions were collected and
dialyzed with PBS.
2.7. Transmission electron microscopy
Proteins or nanovesicles were put onto the surface of a ﬁlm 200
mesh copper grid (Nisshin EM, Tokyo, Japan) and incubated at room
temperature for 10 min. The grid was washed 3 times with PBS, and the
blocking step was carried out using 1% BSA for 5 min. After the grid
was washed with PBS, 100-fold diluted mouse anti c-Myc monoclonal
antibody (FUJIFILM Wako pure Chemical) was loaded onto the grid,
and the grid was incubated at room temperature for 1 h, then washed
with PBS 3 times. The grid was then treated with 100-fold diluted goat
anti-mouse IgG+IgM (H+L) polyclonal antibody conjugated with
10 nm gold (BBI, Solutions, Crumlin, UK) for 1 h. Finally, the grid was
washed 6 times with PBS, followed by negative staining with phosphotungstic acid (2% v/v). Images were acquired with a transmission
electron microscope (TEM, JEM-2100F, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) operated
at 100 kV.
3. Results
Fig. 3. Expression of the S protein and coexpression of the S, E and M proteins
in Bm5 cells using a single recombinant BmNPV. (A) Expression of the S protein
in Bm5 cells. (B) Coexpression of the S, E and M proteins in Bm5 cells. Bm5 cells
were infected with each recombinant BmNPV at M.O.I. 1 and cultivated for 4 d.
At 4 d after infection, the cell viability was almost 100%.

3.1. Expression of SΔTM in silkworm larvae and its puriﬁcation from the
hemolymph
Silkworm larvae have been used for the production of recombinant
proteins instead of cultured cells because they can easily express recombinant proteins on a large scale (Kato et al., 2010; Usami et al.,
2010). SΔTM with its native transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains
removed from its C-terminus (Fig. 1A) was expressed by BmNPV/SΔTM
in silkworm larvae (Fig. 1B). The S protein of MERS-CoV is a class I
fusion protein, and therefore, the truncation of its C-terminal domains
leads to the secretion of SΔTM into the hemolymph in silkworm larvae.
In addition, recombinant BmNPV/S/E/M for the expression of three
structural proteins (full-length S, E and M proteins) was also constructed (Fig. 1C).
When the S and SΔTM proteins were expressed in silkworm, it was
not observed in the hemolymph, but only SΔTM was observed (Fig. 2A).
This result indicates that SΔTM was secreted into the hemolymph because of the removal of its C-terminal domains. SΔTM was puriﬁed from

reported by Zhang et al. (2015). Brieﬂy, 7 × 106 cells were suspended
in 700 μl of PBS containing 0.015% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate and
cOmplete Mini EDTA-free (Roche Diagnostics, Tokyo Japan) and stirred
vigorously. The homogenate was centrifuged at 4000 × g to remove the
cell debris and organelles. The supernatant was ﬁltered by a 0.45 μm
ﬁlter and applied to sucrose density gradient centrifugation (20-60%).
The S protein-rich fractions were collected and dialyzed with PBS. Finally, Triton X-100 and sodium deoxycholate were added into the solution to 0.045% (w/v) and 0.05% (w/v), respectively. The preparation
of nanovesicles by mechanical extrusion (ENVs) was performed according to the protocol reported by Jang et al. (2013). Brieﬂy, 5 × 106
cells were suspended in PBS and extruded 10 times through a 5 μm

Fig. 4. Sucrose density gradient centrifugation
of SNVs and ENVs using Bm5 cells expressing
the S protein (A) and Bm5 cells expressing the
three structural proteins (S, E and M proteins)
(B). SNVs and EMVs were prepared by surfactant treatment and mechanical extrusion, respectively, according to the protocol described
in Materials and Methods. Each protein was
detected by western blot.

181

Journal of Biotechnology 306 (2019) 177–184

T. Kato, et al.

Fig. 5. Immuno-TEM analysis of nanovesicles. (A) SNVs from S protein-expressing Bm5 cells, (B) SNVs from three structural protein-expressing Bm5 cells, (C) ENVs
from S protein-expressing Bm5 cells, (D) ENVs from three structural proteins-expressing Bm5 cells. Immuno-TEM was performed by the protocol described in
Materials and Methods. DLS analysis of SNVs (E) and ENVs (F). Green and blue lines show nanovesicles prepared from S protein-expressing and three structural
protein-expressing Bm5 cells, respectively. Red lines indicate Bm5 cells (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to
the web version of this article).

M and E proteins, each protein was observed in the cell lysates at 3 and
4 d postinfection (Fig. 3B). However, only the M and E proteins were
observed in the culture supernatant on the same days. The cell viability
was almost 100% from 1 to 4 d postinfection. The S protein was not
detected, although the cell supernatant of the coexpressing Bm5 cells
was concentrated by ultracentrifugation (data not shown). In addition,
when the three proteins were coexpressed in silkworm larvae, S proteindisplaying MERS-CoV-LPs were not generated (data not shown). These
results indicate that the M and E proteins may form MERS-CoV-LPs
secreted into the cell culture supernatant, but the S protein was not
contained in the MERS-CoV-LPs.

the hemolymph using aﬃnity chromatography. Three main bands were
observed in the elution fraction by CBB staining and by western blotting
(Fig. 2B). These results indicate that these three bands came from expressed SΔTM. The estimated molecular weight of expressed SΔTM is
approximately 141.9 kDa, and SΔTM has 25 putative N-glycosylation
sites. However, how many N-glycosylation sites in the S protein are Nglycosylated is unknown. These results suggest that one band over
150 kDa may be intact SοTM and that two bands below 150 kDa may be
processed SΔTM. From a larva, 8.3 μg of SΔTM was puriﬁed. Small
particles were observed in the elution fraction by TEM in Fig. 2C, indicating that SΔTM can form such small particles even in the absence of
its C-terminal domains. Using Sf-9 cells Coleman et al. (2014) also reported the formation of the particles consisting of the expressed S
proteins. The puriﬁed SΔTM showed speciﬁc binding to human DPP4
(Fig. 2D) by ELISA, not to human angiotensin converting enzyme 2
(ACE2) which is a receptor for S protein of Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV). These results indicate that SΔTM
expressed in silkworm larvae has biological activity.

3.3. Preparation of S protein-displaying nanovesicles by surfactant
treatment or mechanical extrusion
S protein-displaying nanovesicles were prepared by surfactant
treatment or by mechanical extrusion because S, E and M protein-displaying MERS-CoV-LPs could not be generated in Bm5 cells. The S
protein- or S, E and M protein-expressing Bm5 cells were collected 4 d
after recombinant BmNPV infection. SNVs and ENVs were partially
puriﬁed by sucrose density gradient centrifugation (Fig. 4). The S
protein in SNVs prepared from S protein-expressing Bm5 cells was
observed in fractions 3 to 6, while the S protein in ENVs was observed
in fractions 5 to 9 (Fig. 4A). The S, E and M proteins in SNVs were
observed in fractions 3 to 6, while those in ENVs were observed in
fractions 5 to 8 (Fig. 4B).

3.2. Preparation of S protein-displaying MERS-CoV-LPs
To prepare S protein-displaying MERS-CoV-LPs, full-length S, M and
E proteins were coexpressed in Bm5 cells using a single recombinant
BmNPV/S/E/M (Fig. 1C). Full-length S protein was not secreted into
the culture supernatant at 4 d postinfection when the S protein was
expressed in Bm5 cells (Fig. 3A). In the case of the coexpression of the S,
182

Journal of Biotechnology 306 (2019) 177–184

T. Kato, et al.

The morphology of SNVs and ENVs was investigated by immunoTEM (Fig. 5). In SNVs and ENVs, gold nanoparticles were observed on
the surfaces of nanovesicles. The SNVs were broken and shapeless
(Fig. 5A and B), while the ENVs were clear and round (Fig. 5C and D).
SNVs had a broad peak distribution (Fig. 5E), but ENVs showed a sharp
peak at approximately 140 nm (Fig. 5F). This result indicates that ENVs
were more uniform than SNVs and that the mechanical extrusion
method is favorable for the preparation of nanovesicles displaying the S
protein from insect cells. In addition, the coexpression of the M and E
proteins with the S protein did not have any inﬂuence on the morphology and size of SNVs and ENVs.

the novel human betacoronavirus 2c EMC/2012 (HCoV-EMC) the beginning of another SARS-like pandemic? J. Infect. 65, 477–489.
Charlton Hume, H.K., Vidigal, J., Carrondo, M.J.T., Middelberg, A.P.J., Roldão, A., Lua,
L.H.L., 2019. Synthetic biology for bioengineering virus-like particle vaccines.
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 116, 919–935.
Coleman, C.M., Liu, Y.V., Mu, H., Taylor, J.K., Massare, M., Flyer, D.C., Smith, G.E.,
Frieman, M.B., 2014. Puriﬁed coronavirus spike protein nanoparticles induce coronavirus neutralizing antibodies in mice. Vaccine 32, 3169–3174.
Corti, D., Zhao, J., Pedotti, M., Simonelli, L., Agnihothram, S., Fett, C., FernandezRodriguez, B., Foglierini, M., Agatic, G., Vanzetta, F., Gopal, R., Langrish, C.J.,
Barrett, N.A., Sallusto, F., Baric, R.S., Varani, L., Zambon, M., Perlman, S.,
Lanzavecchia, A., 2015. Prophylactic and postexposure eﬃcacy of a potent human
monoclonal antibody against MERS coronavirus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112,
10473–10478.
Du, L., Yang, Y., Zhou, Y., Lu, L., Li, F., Jiang, S., 2017. MERS-CoV spike protein: a key
target for antivirals. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 21, 131–143.
Fuenmayor, J., Gòdia, F., Cervera, L., 2017. Production of virus-like particles for vaccines.
N. Biotechnol. 39, 174–180.
Gangadaran, P., Hong, C.M., Oh, J.M., Rajendran, R.L., Kalimuthu, S., Son, S.H., Gopal,
A., Zhu, L., Baek, S.H., Jeong, S.Y., Lee, S.W., Lee, J., Ahn, B.C., 2018. In vivo noninvasive imaging of radio-labeled exosome-mimetics derived from red blood cells in
mice. Front. Pharmacol. 9, 817.
Gibson, D.G., 2011. Enzymatic assembly of overlapping DNA fragments. Methods
Enzymol. 498, 349–361.
Guo, P., Huang, J., Zhao, Y., Martin, C.R., Zare, R.N., Moses, M.A., 2018. Nanomaterial
preparation by extrusion through nanoporous membranes. Small 14, e1703493.
Health Protection Agency (HPA), UK Novel Coronavirus Investigation team, 2013.
Evidence of person-to-person transmission within a family cluster of novel coronavirus infections, United Kingdom, February 2013. Euro Surveill. 18, 20427.
Jiang, L., Wang, N., Zuo, T., Shi, X., Poon, K.M., Wu, Y., Gao, F., Li, D., Wang, R., Guo, J.,
Fu, L., Yuen, K.Y., Zheng, B.J., Wang, X., Zhang, L., 2014. Potent neutralization of
MERS-CoV by human neutralizing monoclonal antibodies to the viral spike glycoprotein. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 234ra59.
Jang, S.C., Kim, O.Y., Yoon, C.M., Choi, D.S., Roh, T.Y., Park, J., Nilsson, J., Lötvall, J.,
Kim, Y.K., Gho, Y.S., 2013. Bioinspired exosome-mimetic nanovesicles for targeted
delivery of chemotherapeutics to malignant tumors. ACS Nano 7, 7698–7710.
Kato, T., Manoha, S.L., Tanaka, S., Park, E.Y., 2009. High-titer preparation of Bombyx
mori nucleopolyhedrovirus (BmNPV) displaying recombinant protein in silkworm
larvae by size exclusion chromatography and its characterization. BMC Biotechnol.
9, 55.
Kato, T., Kajikawa, M., Maenaka, K., Park, E.Y., 2010. Silkworm expression system as a
platform technology in life science. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 85, 459–470.
Ma, C., Li, Y., Wang, L., Zhao, G., Tao, X., Tseng, C.T., Zhou, Y., Du, L., Jiang, S., 2014a.
Intranasal vaccination with recombinant receptor-binding domain of MERS-CoV
spike protein induces much stronger local mucosal immune responses than subcutaneous immunization: implication for designing novel mucosal MERS vaccines.
Vaccine 32, 2100–2108.
Ma, C., Wang, L., Tao, X., Zhang, N., Yang, Y., Tseng, C.K., Li, F., Zhou, Y., Jiang, S., Du,
L., 2014b. Searching for an ideal vaccine candidate among diﬀerent MERS coronavirus receptor-binding fragments-the importance of immunofocusing in subunit
vaccine design. Vaccine 32, 6170–6176.
McBride, C.E., Li, J., Machamer, C.E., 2007. The cytoplasmic tail of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike protein contains a novel endoplasmic reticulum retrieval signal that binds COPI and promotes interaction with membrane
protein. J. Virol. 81, 2418–2428.
Memish, Z.A., Mishra, N., Olival, K.J., Fagbo, S.F., Kapoor, V., Epstein, J.H., Alhakeem,
R., Durosinloun, A., Al Asmari, M., Islam, A., Kapoor, A., Briese, T., Daszak, P., Al
Rabeeah, A.A., Lipkin, W.I., 2013. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus in
bats, Saudi Arabia. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 19, 1819–1823.
Mi, P., Zhang, P., Liu, G., 2016. Bio-inspired virus-like nanovesicle for eﬀective vaccination. Hum. Vaccin. Immunother. 12, 2090–2091.
Minkner, R., Park, E.Y., 2018. Puriﬁcation of virus-like particles (VLPs) expressed in the
silkworm Bombyx mori. Biotechnol. Lett. 40, 659–666.
Mortola, E., Roy, P., 2004. Eﬃcient assembly and release of SARS coronavirus-like particles by a heterologous expression system. FEBS Lett. 576, 174–178.
Motohashi, T., Shimojima, T., Fukagawa, T., Maenaka, K., Park, E.Y., 2005. Eﬃcient
large-scale protein production of larvae and pupae of silkworm by Bombyx mori nuclear polyhedrosis virus bacmid system. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 326,
564–569.
Rohovie, M.J., Nagasawa, M., Swartz, J.R., 2017. Virus-like particles: next-generation
nanoparticles for targeted therapeutic delivery. Bioeng. Transl. Med. 2, 43–57.
Siu, Y.L., Teoh, K.T., Lo, J., Chan, C.M., Kien, F., Escriou, N., Tsao, S.W., Nicholls, J.M.,
Altmeyer, R., Peiris, J.S., Bruzzone, R., Nal, B., 2008. The M, E, and N structural
proteins of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus are required for eﬃcient assembly, traﬃcking, and release of virus-like particles. J. Virol. 82,
11318–11330.
Ujike, M., Huang, C., Shirato, K., Makino, S., Taguchi, F., 2016. The contribution of the
cytoplasmic retrieval signal of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus to intracellular accumulation of S proteins and incorporation of S protein into virus-like
particles. J. Gen. Virol. 97, 1853–1864.
Usami, A., Suzuki, T., Nagaya, H., Kaki, H., Ishiyama, S., 2010. Silkworm as a host of
baculovirus expression. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 11, 246–250.
Wang, Q., Qi, J., Yuan, Y., Xuan, Y., Han, P., Wan, Y., Ji, W., Li, Y., Wu, Y., Wang, J.,
Iwamoto, A., Woo, P.C., Yuen, K.Y., Yan, J., Lu, G., Gao, G.F., 2014. Bat origins of
MERS-CoV supported by bat coronavirus HKU4 usage of human receptor CD26. Cell
Host Microbe 16, 328–337.

4. Discussion
In this study, S protein-displaying MERS-CoV-LPs composed of the
S, E and M proteins were not generated in Bm5 cells and silkworm
larvae. The S protein was expressed by the fusion of the bombyxin
signal peptide from B. mori instead of its native peptide (Fig. 1).
Therefore, we tried to express full-length S protein with its native signal
peptide for the preparation of S protein-displaying MERS-CoV-LPs but
failed. In mammalian cells, the endoplasmic reticulum retrieval signal
(ERRS) of the S protein of coronaviruses, which occurs in the cytoplasmic domain at the C-terminus of the protein, is required for the
accumulation of S protein in the postmedial Golgi compartment and its
return to the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC), followed by
the budding of coronaviruses and VLPs (McBride et al., 2007; Ujike
et al., 2016). We also coexpressed the S protein fused with the signal
peptide and the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of ERGIC-53
from B. mori, which is a non-glycosylated type I membrane protein of
53 kDa resided in ERGIC, instead of its native domains with the E and M
proteins in Bm5 cells and silkworm larvae. However, S protein-displaying MERS-CoV-LPs were not produced. On the other hands, it was
previously reported by Wang et al. that the successful production of S
protein-displaying MERS-CoV-LPs composed of the S, E and M proteins
in Sf-9 cells (Wang et al., 2017). It is unknown why Bm5 cells and
silkworms cannot produce S protein-displaying MERS-CoV-LPs by the
coexpression of S, E and M proteins. The localization of S protein in
Bm5 cells may clarify why S protein was not displayed on particles
composing of M and E proteins.
To prepare S protein-displaying nanovesicles, we adopted two
methods, surfactant treatment (Zhang et al., 2015) and mechanical
extrusion using an extruder (Gangadaran et al., 2018; Jang et al., 2013).
These methods allow the easy and eﬃcient production of virus-like
nanovesicles and exosome-mimic vesicles from mammalian cells for
vaccine development and drug delivery systems. In this study, we
successfully produced three recombinant proteins, S, E and M, of MERSCoV-displaying SNVs and ENVs by surfactant treatment or mechanical
extrusion, respectively, which were VLP mimetic nanovesicles. For the
application of these VLP mimetic nanovesicles composed of multiple
structural proteins of viruses, their properties, including stability,
morphology and functionality, should be investigated in detail.
Funding
This project was ﬁnancially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant-inAid for Scientiﬁc Research (A) (Grant No. 16H02544).
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
References
Chan, J.F., Li, K.S., To, K.K., Cheng, V.C., Chen, H., Yuen, K.Y., 2012. Is the discovery of

183

Journal of Biotechnology 306 (2019) 177–184

T. Kato, et al.

Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113, E2564–E2569.
WHO, 2019, https://www.who.int/emergencies/mers-cov/en/.
Zhang, P., Chen, Y., Zeng, Y., Shen, C., Li, R., Guo, Z., Li, S., Zheng, Q., Chu, C., Wang, Z.,
Zheng, Z., Tian, R., Ge, S., Zhang, X., Xia, N.S., Liu, G., Chen, X., 2015. Virus-mimetic
nanovesicles as a versatile antigen-delivery system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112,
E6129–E6138.

Wang, C., Zheng, X., Gai, W., Zhao, Y., Wang, H., Wang, H., Feng, N., Chi, H., Qiu, B., Li,
N., Wang, T., Gao, Y., Yang, S., Xia, X., 2017. MERS-CoV virus-like particles produced
in insect cells induce speciﬁc humoral and cellular immunity in rhesus macaques.
Oncotarget 8, 12686–12694.
Weissmann, F., Petzold, G., VanderLinden, R., Huis In’t Veld, P.J., Brown, N.G., Lampert,
F., Westermann, S., Stark, H., Schulman, B.A., Peters, J.M., 2016. biGBac enables
rapid gene assembly for the expression of large multisubunit protein complexes. Proc.

184

