Protective effects of hypericin against infectious bronchitis virus induced apoptosis and reactive oxygen species in chicken embryo kidney cells
Huijie Chen,∗ ,† ,1 Rui Feng,∗ ,1 Ishfaq Muhammad,∗ Ghulam Abbas,∗ Yue Zhang,∗ Yudong Ren,‡
Xiaodan Huang,∗ Ruili Zhang,∗ Lei Diao,† Xiurong Wang,§ and Guangxing Li∗ ,2

Key Laboratory for Laboratory Animals and Comparative Medicine of Heilongjiang Province, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China; † College of Biological and
Pharmaceutical Engineering, Jilin Agriculture Science and Technology College, Jilin 132101, China; ‡ College of
Electrical and Information, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China; and § State Key Laboratory
of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Harbin 150001, China

Avian infectious bronchitis virus (IBV),
a coronavirus, causes infectious bronchitis leading to
enormous economic loss in the poultry industry worldwide. Hypericin (HY) is an excellent compound that
has been investigated in antiviral, antineoplastic, and
antidepressant. To investigate the inhibition effect of
HY on IBV infection in chicken embryo kidney (CEK)
cells, 3 different experimental designs: pre-treatment
of cells prior to IBV infection, direct treatment of
IBV-infected cells, and pre-treatment of IBV prior to
cell infection were used. Quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR), immunofluorescence assay (IFA), flow cytometry, and fluorescence microscopy were performed
and virus titer was determined by TCID50 . The results revealed that HY had a good anti-IBV effect
when HY directly treated the IBV-infected cells, and
virus infectivity decreased in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, HY inhibited IBV-induced apoptosis in CEK cells, and significantly reduced the mRNA
expression levels of Fas, FasL, JNK, Bax, Caspase
3, and Caspase 8, and significantly increased Bcl-2
mRNA expression level in CEK cells. In addition, HY
treatment could decrease IBV-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in CEK cells. These
results suggested that HY showed potential antiviral activities against IBV infection involving the inhibition of apoptosis and ROS generation in CEK
cells.

Key words: hypericin, infectious bronchitis virus, apoptosis, reactive oxygen species, chicken embryo
kidney cells

Avian infectious bronchitis virus (IBV), a member
of the Coronaviridae family (Cook et al., 2012), causes
mild-to-acute respiratory disease in chickens (Benyeda
et al., 2009; Westerbeck and Machamer, 2019). IBV infects chickens via the respiratory tract, from which it
can spread to other epithelial tissues. Therefore, IBV
not only injures the respiratory tract, but also causes
damage to the digestive system and urogenital system,
such as the proventriculus, kidney, ovary, and oviduct,
resulting in respiratory disease, interstitial nephritis,
and dysplasia of the oviduct (Zhong et al., 2016). IBV
has led to severe economic losses in the poultry industry
worldwide. It has been demonstrated that IBV not only
causes direct loss due to high mortality, secondary bac© 2019 Poultry Science Association Inc.
Received May 28, 2019.
Accepted July 26, 2019.
1 Theses authors contributed equally to this work.
2 Corresponding author: ligx@neau.edu.cn

terial infection, poor meat production, and egg quality,
but also indirect losses arises from increasing drug costs
and vaccination in IBV prevention (Liang et al., 2019).
There are multiple known strains of IBV, and increasing numbers of variants have emerged continuous
recombinations, resulting in more diversified and complicated genotypes and serotypes (Feng et al., 2015;
Laconi et al., 2019). Because of poor vaccine cross
protection among different virus serotypes, it makes
difficult to prevent and control IBV infection with the
current precautionary measures (Mo et al., 2013; Yan
et al., 2018). Thus, finding effective antiviral drugs
or agents is imperative for alternative approach to
prevent IBV infection.
The Chinese government has prohibited the use of antiviral drugs in food animals. Thus, utilization of traditional herbs remains a major focus in antiviral research.
Several reports have confirmed that traditional Chinese
herbs could effectively inhibit the replication of various
viruses (Chen et al., 2018; Dziewulska et al., 2018; Lv
et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2017). Hypericin (HY), a natural
