Recent advances and perspectives of nucleic acid detection for coronavirus
Minzhe Shen, Ying Zhou, Jiawei Ye, Abdu Ahmed Abdullah AL-maskri, Yu Kang, Su Zeng**,
Sheng Cai*
Institute of Drug Metabolism and Pharmaceutical Analysis, Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Anti-Cancer Drug Research, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, China

The recent pneumonia outbreak caused by a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in Chinais posing a great
threat to global public health. Therefore, rapid and a accurate identiﬁcation of pathogenic viruses plays a
vital role in selecting appropriate treatments, saving people’s lives and preventing epidemics. It is
important to establish a quick standard diagnostic test for the detection of the infectious disease (COVID19) to prevent subsequent secondary spread. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is regarded as a gold
standard test for the molecular diagnosis of viral and bacterial infections with high sensitivity and
speciﬁcity. Isothermal nucleic acid ampliﬁcation is considered to be a highly promising candidate
method due to its fundamental advantage in quick procedure time at constant temperature without
thermocycler operation. A variety of improved or new approaches also have been developed. This review
summarizes the currently available detection methods for coronavirus nucleic acid. It is anticipated that
this will assist researchers and clinicians in developing better techniques for timely and effective
detection of coronavirus infection.

Keywords:
Coronavirus
Nucleic acid detection
PCR-Based methods
Isothermal nucleic acid ampliﬁcation-based
methods
Microarray-based methods

The ﬁght against infectious diseases caused by viruses remains a
challenging and endless task despite the tremendous efforts and
signiﬁcant advances in public healthcare. Infectious diseases pose a
signiﬁcant risk to human health and have led to approximately onefourth of deaths worldwide [1,2]. Coronaviruses belong to the family
of Coronaviridae and may cause respiratory and neurological diseases [3]. Until now, six human coronaviruses (HCoVs) have been
identiﬁed, namely, HCoV-229E, HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-OC43, HCoVNL63, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV),
and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) [4].
In particular, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV once caused pandemic [5].
Recently, the emergence of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in
China and its subsequent worldwide spread has been challenging
the global public health community to confront a novel infectious
disease (coronavirus disease 2019, COVID-19). As of 22 February

2020, there were 77,816 conﬁrmed cases of COVID-19 and 2012
deaths (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/). In this
epidemic, the detections of SARS-CoV-2 RNA were shown to be
useful for the early diagnosis of COVID-19, which would be beneﬁcial to controling the sources of infection and help patients to
prevent the illness progression. The rapid and accurate detection of
coronavirus is therefore becoming increasingly important.
With the advance in molecular biology technology, nucleic acid
detection methods have developed rapidly and become a revolutionary technology for virus detection. Especially, the method
based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is characterized by rapid
detection, high sensitivity and speciﬁcity, which has been regarded
as the "gold standard" for virus detection. Novel PCR-based
methods also have been reported to enhance both the speciﬁcity
and sensitivity of the assay. Besides, several molecular tests which
employ non-PCR-based methods, such as isothermal nucleic acid
ampliﬁcation (loop mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation (LAMP) and
nucleic acid sequence-based ampliﬁcation), were developed for the
detection of coronavirus RNA. In this work, we reviewed various
approaches currently available for detection of coronavirus. It is
anticipated that this will assist researchers to develop rapid and
accurate detection techniques.