G Model
JOGOH 101729 No. of Pages 3

Journal of Gynecology Obstetrics and Human Reproduction xxx (2019) xxx–xxx

Available online at

ScienceDirect
www.sciencedirect.com

Guidelines for clinical practice

Recommendations for the surgical management of gynecological
cancers during the COVID-19 pandemic - FRANCOGYN group for the
CNGOF$
A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Article history:
Available online xxx

Introduction: In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, speciﬁc recommendations are required for the
management of patients with gynecologic cancer.
Materials and method: The FRANCOGYN group of the National College of French Gynecologists and
Obstetricians (CNGOF) convened to develop recommendations based on the consensus conference
model.
Results: If a patient with a gynecologic cancer presents with COVID-19, surgical management should be
postponed for at least 15 days. For cervical cancer, radiotherapy and concomitant radiochemotherapy
could replace surgery as ﬁrst-line treatment and the value of lymph node staging should be reviewed on a
case-by-case basis. For advanced ovarian cancers, neoadjuvant chemotherapy should be preferred over
primary cytoreduction surgery. It is legitimate not to perform hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy during the COVID-19 pandemic. For patients who are scheduled to undergo interval
surgery, chemotherapy can be continued and surgery performed after 6 cycles. For patients with early
stage endometrial cancer of low and intermediate preoperative ESMO risk, hysterectomy with bilateral
adnexectomy combined with a sentinel lymph node procedure is recommended. Surgery can be
postponed for 1–2 months in low-risk endometrial cancers (FIGO Ia stage on MRI and grade 1–2
endometrioid cancer on endometrial biopsy). For patients of high ESMO risk, the MSKCC algorithm
(combining PET-CT and sentinel lymph node biopsy) should be applied to avoid pelvic and lumbar-aortic
lymphadenectomy.
Conclusion: During the COVID-19 pandemic, management of a patient with cancer should be adapted to
limit the risks associated with the virus without incurring loss of chance.
© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BYNC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Keywords:
Gynaecological cancer
COVID-19
Guideline
Management

These recommendations are based on current knowledge but
may evolve as new data emerges.
In the current pandemic context of COVID-19 and the
subsequent saturation of resuscitation services, over the next 2–
3 months we must not only reconsider our therapeutic indications
but also limit the risk of infection in our cancer patients. To reduce
the risk of infections two priorities are crucial: to limit high risk
situations such as surgery and chemotherapy; and to limit the
patient’s contact with healthcare workers and, in particular, with
places of care.
While bearing in mind that the main objective for our patients
with pelvic gynecologic cancer remains therapeutic management,
all alternatives to surgery must be considered. In particular, the
risk-beneﬁt ratio for surgical procedures must be analyzed on a
case-by-case basis and in multidisciplinary meeting, taking into

$
Groupe FRANCOGYN (Groupe de Recherche en chirurgie Oncologique et
Gynécologique), Groupe D’intérêt du CNGOF (Collège National des Gynécologues
Obstétriciens Français). 91, boulevard de Sébastopol. 75002 P.

account the risk of loss of chance that could result from an
alternative strategy that has not been proven. The main objective is
to avoid postoperative complications and the need for ensuing
postoperative intensive care and in particular the occupation of a
resuscitation bed. However, in as far as it is possible according to
the saturation of the structure of care related to COVID-19, it is
advisable to apply traditional recommendations.
If a patient presents with COVID-19, surgical management and
all other oncological treatment should be postponed for at least 15
days.
Cancer patients are 4–8 times more likely than the general
population to develop severe respiratory complications related to
COVID-19 marked by rapid onset and often fatal outcome. The risk
is more acute if they have undergone surgery or chemotherapy in
the preceding weeks. These patients’ vital prognosis is at risk in
addition to the risk linked to cancer. They should be provided with
a mask and use hand sanitizers on arrival at the hospital.
Preamble
Management of the oncology patient is conventionally based on
two strategies:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jogoh.2020.101729
2468-7847/© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

Please cite this article in press as: C. Akladios, et al., Recommendations for the surgical management of gynecological cancers during the
COVID-19 pandemic - FRANCOGYN group for the CNGOF, J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jogoh.2020.101729

G Model
JOGOH 101729 No. of Pages 3

2

C. Akladios et al. / J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod xxx (2019) 101729

1) Curative: for localized diseases, or for certain advanced /
metastatic cancers characterized by a particular sensitivity to
treatments or a disease course which makes them curable by
medical, surgical or radiotherapeutic treatment
2) Palliative (non-curative): for diseases too advanced to be
curable.
In the current COVID-19 context, patient prioritization should
integrate the nature of the therapeutic strategy (curative versus
palliative), their age, estimated life expectancy, and whether the
diagnosis is recent or not.
Taking into account the duration of incubation and the high
percentage of asymptomatic patients, all pathologic samples
should be considered as potentially infected. A recent publication
has shown that ﬁxation in formalin can inactivate the COVID-19
virus. The risk of toxicity linked to formalin exposure appears to be
less serious than that linked to the handling of fresh, non-ﬁxed
tissue potentially carrying COVID-19. If necessary, operating
samples from patients included in clinical trials can be sent fresh
to the laboratory but all the necessary precautions should be
applied.
Imaging tests should be maintained or postponed according to
their importance and the impact on the choice of treatment
strategy.
1. All multidisciplinary meetings
All multidisciplinary meetings should be organized following
the recommendations of the ONCORIF group (https://www.
oncorif.fr/2020/03/coronavirus-recommandations-et-contenusﬁables/). As far as possible, multidisciplinary meetings should be
held with a triple objective: not to delay the care of patients who
need it; not to unnecessarily mobilize doctors who are not
absolutely necessary for the discussion; not to promote the
transmission of the virus between cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) doctors. It is strongly advised to hold dematerialized
meetings when possible based on video or teleconferencing even
if the doctors practice in the same establishment.
2. We propose the following adaptations for the management of
patients with gynecologic pelvic cancer during the COVID-19
pandemic period
2.1. For cervical cancer
Radiotherapy and concomitant radiochemotherapy should
replace surgery as ﬁrst-line treatment whenever possible. In
particular, the value of lymph node staging surgeries must be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis depending on the site, the results
of imaging tests and the disease stage. Hysterectomy after
concomitant radiochmotherapy is only indicated if a posttherapeutic tumor residue is identiﬁed.

new cycles of chemotherapy after their closing surgery (in
agreement with INCa recommendations https://www.e-cancer.
fr/Expertises-et-publications/Catalogue-des-publications/Summary-Initial-management-of-epithelial-ovarian-cancer-cases).
For presumed early stage ovarian cancers according to
adnexectomy, restaging surgery can be deferred from 1–2 months
if access to anesthesia-resuscitation is saturated.
Furthermore, in case of saturation of access to anesthesiaresuscitation, a 2-step strategy is recommended for images
suggestive of ovarian cancer on an isolated ovarian mass:
adnexectomy of the suspect mass, and decision to perform
complete staging surgery on ﬁnal histologic analysis and decision
of a CPR doctor.
2.3. For endometrial cancer
Early stage cancers
Surgical treatment remains the gold standard for early stage
endometrial cancer. The minimally invasive laparoscopic robotassisted or non-assisted route is the preferred option. Total
hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy associated with a
sentinel node procedure should be performed in patients of
low and intermediate preoperative ESMO risk. Surgery can be
postponed for 1–2 months for low-risk endometrial cancers (FIGO
Ia stage on MRI and grade 1–2 endometrioid cancer on
endometrial biopsy) if there is no element of discrepancy on
the initial assessment, especially if the patient is elderly and / or
with comorbidities, without loss of oncological chance for the
patient.
For patients at high ESMO risk according to pelvic and lumbaraortic lymphadenectomy staging, comorbidities and the terrain
(obesity, anticoagulant treatment, diabetes, age) should be taken
into account. In this context, it would be legitimate to apply the
MSKCC algorithm (associating PET CT and GS procedure) to avoid
lymphadenectomy which increases the risk of per- and postoperative complications and the subsequent risk of requiring postoperative resuscitation.
For advanced endometrial cancers (stages III and IV), ﬁrst-line
medical treatment should be administered.
For suspected endometrial cancer
For a patient who presents postmenopausal metrorrhagia and
endometrial thickening on ultrasound, endometrial pipelle
sampling should be performed in consultation. Diagnostic
hysteroscopy in consultation should be avoided unless performed
at the same time (to limit the number of patient trips). In the
event of a non-contributory diagnostic assessment, the date of
the diagnostic hysteroscopy and biopsy curettage should be
adjusted according to the degree of suspicion of endometrial
cancer and the constraints of access to the operating room. If the
risk of cancer appears low and the patient is elderly, the
procedure under general anesthesia can be postponed until after
the conﬁnement period for COVID-19.

2.2. For ovarian cancer
2.4. For vulvar cancers
For advanced cancers which may require the use of postoperative resuscitation for cytoreduction surgery, neoadjuvant chemotherapy should be the preferred option even if primary
cytoreduction surgery could be envisaged. It is legitimate not to
offer hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) to
patients during the COVID-19 pandemic period when resuscitation
resources are saturated. If access to the operating theater is
restricted due to the crisis, patients scheduled to undergo interval
surgery after 3 or 4 cycles of chemotherapy could continue their
chemotherapy and surgery be performed after 6 cycles of
chemotherapy. The patient should then undergo at least two

The management of vulvar cancers, for which surgery remains
the standard and often the only treatment option, should not
change. However, this cancer often affects the elderly and if a
tumor has not progressed much in an elderly patient, treatment
may be postponed for a few weeks. The patient should be
discharged as early as possible and cared for at home to reduce the
duration of hospitalization.
When surgical management involves heavy surgery (amputation), the use of concomitant radiochemotherapy should be
discussed in CPR.

Please cite this article in press as: C. Akladios, et al., Recommendations for the surgical management of gynecological cancers during the
COVID-19 pandemic - FRANCOGYN group for the CNGOF, J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jogoh.2020.101729

G Model
JOGOH 101729 No. of Pages 3

C. Akladios et al. / J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod xxx (2019) 101729

2.5. For vaginal cancer
Most patients presenting with vaginal cancer are at an
advanced stage and will require exclusive radio- / chemo- /
brachytherapy treatment. The value of lymph node staging surgery
must be reviewed on a case-by-case basis depending on the
location, the results of imaging tests, and the disease stage.
2.6. For trophoblastic tumors
Trophoblastic tumors are considered curable but have a high
metastatic potential. This justiﬁes maintaining the care of these
young patients without delay.
 Patients with low risk trophoblastic tumors (FIGO score 6)
should be administered methotrexate at home to avoid the four
injections of each cure in an outpatient setting.
 Patients with high-risk tumors should be administered multidrug regimens without delay given the generally multimetastatic nature from the outset.
Finally, hydatidiform moles should be managed by the standard
treatment of curettage suction under ultrasound control and not by
medicinal evacuation which carries a high risk of retention.
The French Reference Center for Trophoblastic Diseases is
available for case-by-case discussion and can provide the
treatment protocol with methotrexate at home if necessary
(touria.hajri@chu-lyon.fr).
3. Post-therapeutic follow-up
Post-therapeutic oncological follow-up consultations should be
postponed for 2 months (i.e., after the COVID-19 conﬁnement
period), because there is no obvious loss of chance. Follow-up can
be performed by teleconsultation when the technical tools are
available. However, follow-up of endometrial and / or cervical
cancer is based on clinical examination, which cannot be replaced
by teleconsultation, and avoid a follow-up consultation 2 months
later.
Cherif Akladiosa
Henri Azaisb
Marcos Ballesterc
Soﬁane Bendifallahd
Pierre-Adrien Bolzee
Nicolas Bourdelf
Alexandre Bricouc
Geoffroy Canlorbeb

3

Xavier Carcopinog
Pauline Chauvetf
Pierre Collineth
Charles Coutanti
Yohann Dabid
Ludivine Dionj
Tristan Gauthierk
Olivier Graesslinl
Cyrille Huchonm
Martin Koskasn
Frederic Kridelkao
Vincent Lavouej,*
Lise Lecointrea
Matthieu Mezzadrip
Camille Mimounp
Lobna Ouldamerq
Emilie Raimondl
Cyril Toubould
a
Service de gynécologie, CHU de Hautepierre, 67000 Strasbourg,
France
b
Service de gynécologie, Hopital la Pitié Salpetriee, 75013 Paris,
France
c
Service de gynécologie, Dioconessess Croix Saint Simon, 75012 Paris,
France
d
Service de gynécologie obstétrique, HôpitalTenon, 75020 Paris,
France
e
Service de gynécologie Obstétrique, CHU Lyon Sud, 69000 Lyon,
France
f
Service de gynécologie obstétrique, Chu Clermont Ferrand, 63000
Clermont Ferrand, France
g
Service de gyécologie, La Timone, 13000 Marseille, France
h
Service de gynécologie, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandres, 59 000 Lille,
France
i
Centre de Lutte Contre le Cancer, 21 000 Dijon, France
j
Service de gynécologie, CHU Hôpital Sud, 35000 Rennes, France
k
Service de gynécologie obstétrique, CHU, 87000 Limoges, France
l
Service de gynécologie obstétrique, CHU 51000 Reims, France
m
Service de gynécologie obstétrique, CHI Poissy, 78300 Poissy, France
n
Service de gynécologie obstétrique, Hopital Bichat, 75018 Paris,
France
o
Service de chirurgie oncologique, CHU, Liege, Belgique, France
p
Service de gynécologie, Hôpital Lariboisière, 75010 Paris, France
q
Service de gynécologie, CHU Tours, 37000 Tours, France
* Corresponding author at: Service de gynécologie, Hôpital sud, 16
BD de Bulgarie, 35000 Rennes, France.
E-mail address: Vincent.lavoue@gmail.com (V. Lavoue).

Please cite this article in press as: C. Akladios, et al., Recommendations for the surgical management of gynecological cancers during the
COVID-19 pandemic - FRANCOGYN group for the CNGOF, J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jogoh.2020.101729

