Role of Porcine Aminopeptidase N and Sialic Acids in Porcine Coronavirus Infections in Primary Porcine Enterocytes
Tingting Cui 1 , Sebastiaan Theuns 1 , Jiexiong Xie 1 , Wim Van den Broeck 2
Hans J. Nauwynck 1, *
Laboratory of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Salisburylaan 133,
B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium; tingting.cui@ugent.be (T.C.); sebastiaan.theuns@ugent.be (S.T.);
jiexiong.xie@ugent.be (J.X.)
Department of Morphology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Salisburylaan 133,
B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium; wim.vandenbroeck@ugent.be
Correspondence: hans.nauwynck@ugent.be

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) and transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV)
have been reported to use aminopeptidase N (APN) as a cellular receptor. Recently, the role of
APN as a receptor for PEDV has been questioned. In our study, the role of APN in PEDV and
TGEV infections was studied in primary porcine enterocytes. After seven days of cultivation, 89% of
enterocytes presented microvilli and showed a two- to five-fold higher susceptibility to PEDV and
TGEV. A significant increase of PEDV and TGEV infection was correlated with a higher expression
of APN, which was indicative that APN plays an important role in porcine coronavirus infections.
However, PEDV and TGEV infected both APN positive and negative enterocytes. PEDV and TGEV
Miller showed a higher infectivity in APN positive cells than in APN negative cells. In contrast,
TGEV Purdue replicated better in APN negative cells. These results show that an additional receptor
exists, different from APN for porcine coronaviruses. Subsequently, treatment of enterocytes with
neuraminidase (NA) had no effect on infection efficiency of TGEV, implying that terminal cellular
sialic acids (SAs) are no receptor determinants for TGEV. Treatment of TGEV with NA significantly
enhanced the infection which shows that TGEV is masked by SAs.
Keywords: enterocytes; porcine coronavirus; transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV); Porcine
epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV); aminopeptidase N; sialic acids

Coronaviruses are known as human and animal pathogens that mainly infect the epithelium of the
respiratory or intestinal tract. Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), transmissible gastroenteritis
virus (TGEV), and its variant porcine respiratory coronavirus (PRCV) are classified as Alphacoronavirus.
They are enveloped viruses containing a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome of approximately
28.5 kb. The positive ssRNA serves as mRNA for the generation of viral replicative proteins by
translation of open reading frame (ORF) 1a and ORF1b. The genome contains a 50 untranslated
region (UTR), a 30 UTR, and at least seven ORFs. ORF1a and ORF1b make up two-thirds of the viral
genome and encode the non-structural replicase polyproteins (replicases 1a and 1b), which further
guide the viral replication and translation, regulate cellular processes, and potentially fulfill other
unknown functions. The remaining proximal third of the genome encodes four structural proteins
(spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N) by ORF2, ORF4, ORF5, and ORF6,
respectively). The S protein is a type I glycoprotein that projects from the virions surface forming
Viruses 2020, 12, 402; doi:10.3390/v12040402

the corona-like appearance of viral particles. It contains an N-terminal ectodomain (S1) and a short
C-terminal cytoplasmic tail (S2). It is known that the peripheral S1 portion is a globular cellular receptor
binding subunit while the transmembrane S2 portion is required to mediate fusion of viral and cellular
membranes [1]. The S protein also contains important antigenic determinants for coronaviruses. The
triple-spanning M protein has a short N-terminal glycosylated domain, a long C-terminal domain,
and three transmembrane domains [2]. M proteins play key roles in virion assembly/budding. The
lateral interactions between M and E proteins are supposed to mediate the formation of the virion
envelope. The M–S protein interactions are also needed to retain the spike proteins at the budding site,
incorporating the S proteins into the viral envelope [3]. The E protein is a small hydrophobic protein
of 9–12 kDa. It plays crucial roles during virus budding and transiently localizes at the pre-Golgi
compartment before progressing to the Golgi apparatus. Deletion of the E protein in TGEV arrests
virus transportation and maturation [4]. The E protein possesses an ion channel activity, contributing
to virus virulence and pathogenesis [5].
The replication of viruses in their host cells is firstly mediated by the virus binding to the cellular
receptors. Some Alphacoronaviruses, including human coronavirus 229E (HCoV-229E), feline infectious
peritonitis virus (FIPV), canine coronavirus (CCoV), TGEV, and PEDV, may use aminopeptidase N
(APN) as a cellular receptor [6–10]. APN is a type II cell membrane metalloprotease, that is linked
to cells by its N-terminal cytoplasmic domain. It is highly abundant on the brush border membrane
of the mature small intestinal enterocytes, kidney, and liver epithelial cells. APN is highly species
specific. Human coronaviruses cannot recognize porcine APN as a cellular receptor because of certain
differences in glycosylation regions [11]. APN has been identified as a major receptor for TGEV, as
it has been shown that TGEV virions are able to specifically bind to purified APN and conferred
the infectivity of TGEV to a non-permissive cell line when the cells were expressing recombinant
APN [7]. An interaction between APN and PEDV infection has also been demonstrated. Transient
expression of APN in Mardin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells conferred susceptibility of these
cells to PEDV infection and the infection was inhibited by anti-APN polyclonal antibodies [9]. Cong
and colleagues demonstrated that APN mediates PEDV infection in Vero E6 and in an immortalized
porcine enteric cell line [12]. However, increasingly more data demonstrates that APN is not essential
for PEDV infection, because PEDV exhibits no binding to soluble APN [13,14]. Moreover, Vero cells
are commonly used for PEDV propagation and cultivation in vitro. The endogenous expression of
APN in Vero cells was undetectable in the mRNA and the protein levels, which challenges the role of
APN as a cellular receptor for PEDV. Therefore, whether APN is a functional receptor for PEDV is
disputable. However, no data are available on the role of APN in primary enterocytes.
In addition to APN, a sialic acid binding capacity has been reported for TGEV and PEDV [15,16].
Sialic acids are electronegatively charged monosaccharides in animals and some microorganisms.
They are prominently positioned at the outer end of N-glycans, O-glycans, and glycosphingolipids.
TGEV shows a hemagglutinating activity with α-2,3-linked sialic acids on the erythrocyte surface as
target. Among different types of sialic acids, N-glycolylneuraminic acid was recognized by TGEV
more efficiently than N-acetylneuraminic acid [15]. Sialic acid binding by TGEV is not essential
in the initiation of infection of cultured cells, as TGEV mutants lacking sialic acid binding activity
can be propagated to the same extent in cultured cells [15]. However, sialic acid binding activity is
important for the enteropathogenicity of TGEV. Mutants without sialic acid binding were not capable of
initiating intestinal infection in vivo, showing that sialic acid binding is required for efficient intestinal
infections [17]. This sialic acid binding activity of TGEV is supposed to help the virus to penetrate the
mucus layer and to infect intestinal epithelial cells. PEDV is also able to bind sialic acids. PEDV S1
protein was reported to bind bovine and porcine mucins that contain a mixture of different types of
sugar [16,18]. Furthermore, Neu5Ac was identified as the most favored binding sugar of PEDV S1
by a glycan array screen [16]. Different from the APN binding domain in the C-terminal of PEDV S1
(residues 477–629), the sialic acid binding domain was reported in the N-terminal of PEDV S1 (residues
1–320) [18].
In the present study, the co-culture system of primary porcine enterocytes that was established in
our laboratory was used to study the role of APN in PEDV and TGEV infection in their target cells [19].
Further, it was investigated whether sialic acids are cellular receptors for TGEV in primary enterocytes.
