Clinical Review & Education

JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery | Special Communication

Safety Recommendations for Evaluation and Surgery
of the Head and Neck During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Babak Givi, MD; Bradley A. Schiff, MD; Steven B. Chinn, MD, MPH; Daniel Clayburgh, MD, PhD;
N. Gopalakrishna Iyer, MBBS, PhD; Scharukh Jalisi, MD; Michael G. Moore, MD;
Cherie-Ann Nathan, MD; Lisa A. Orloff, MD; James P. O’Neill, MD, MBA; Noah Parker, MD;
Chad Zender, MD; Luc G. T. Morris, MD, MSc; Louise Davies, MD, MS
Author Audio Interview
IMPORTANCE The rapidly expanding novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic,

caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, has challenged the medical
community to an unprecedented degree. Physicians and health care workers are at added risk
of exposure and infection during the course of patient care. Because of the rapid spread of
this disease through respiratory droplets, health care workers who come in close contact with
the upper aerodigestive tract during diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, such as
otolaryngologists–head and neck surgeons, are particularly at risk. A set of safety
recommendations was created based on a review of the literature and communications with
physicians with firsthand knowledge of safety procedures during the COVID-19 pandemic.
OBSERVATIONS A high number of health care workers were infected during the first phase of
the pandemic in the city of Wuhan, China. Subsequently, by adopting strict safety
precautions, other regions were able to achieve high levels of safety for health care workers
without jeopardizing the care of patients. The most common procedures related to the
examination and treatment of upper aerodigestive tract diseases were reviewed. Each
category was reviewed based on the potential risk imposed to health care workers. Specific
recommendations were made based on the literature, when available, or consensus best
practices. Specific safety recommendations were made for performing tracheostomy in
patients with COVID-19.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Preserving a highly skilled health care workforce is a top
priority for any community and health care system. Based on the experience of health care
systems in Asia and Europe, by following strict safety guidelines, the risk of exposure and
infection of health care workers could be greatly reduced while providing high levels of care.
The provided recommendations, which may evolve over time, could be used as broad
guidance for all health care workers who are involved in the care of patients with COVID-19.
JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. doi:10.1001/jamaoto.2020.0780
Published online March 31, 2020.

T

he coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has put
unprecedented challenges on the medical community. Physicians and other health care workers who perform and participate in examinations and procedures within the head and neck
region and airway are at particularly high risk of exposure and infection from aerosol and droplet contamination. Specific data on the
risk of infection in otolaryngologists–head and neck surgeons are not
available. However, one of the earliest reports from Wuhan, China,
where severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2) was first identified, found 40 health care workers among the
first consecutive 138 patients hospitalized.1 During the severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak of 2003 in Canada, 51% of
the 438 cases were health care workers, and 3 died from SARSrelated causes.2 While the figures are worrying, other data suggest
that through the use of careful hygiene, health care workers can stay
safe. A case report of early COVID-19 experience from Singapore3
revealed that none of the 41 health care workers who took care of a
jamaotolaryngology.com

Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Babak Givi,
MD, Department of Otolaryngology–
Head and Neck Surgery, NYU
Langone Health, 160 E 34th St,
7th Floor, New York, NY 10016
(babak.givi@nyulangone.org).

patient with severe pneumonia before their diagnosis of COVID-19
became infected themselves or developed symptoms. These health
care workers had been present during intubation and extubation of
the patient; they were present for at least 10 minutes at a distance
of less than 2 m from the patient, with 85% wearing a surgical mask
and the remainder wearing N95 masks.
The preservation of this highly skilled, limited workforce should
be a top priority of health care officials and policy makers. At the time
of this writing, to our knowledge, no unified, widely agreed-on protocols exist on how to perform a routine examination of the head and
neck; office-based rigid and flexible endoscopy of the nose, sinuses,
andlarynx;tracheostomy;andothercommonoperations.Somehealth
authorities and societies have developed separate guidelines.4
This article was prepared in consultation with otolaryngologists–
head and neck surgeons and other health care workers in the US,
Asia, and Europe, applying existing guidance from the infection control specialty to physicians potentially at risk from exposure to the

(Reprinted) JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery Published online March 31, 2020

© 2020 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 04/17/2020

E1

Clinical Review & Education Special Communication

Safety Recommendations for Evaluation and Surgery of the Head and Neck During the COVID-19 Pandemic

head and neck of infected patients. As the available information
evolves, we expect to modify these guidelines. We expect that each
health authority or organization will make specific decisions appropriate to their community. These recommendations have been developed to give broad guidance to practitioners. Per the US Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the following factors should
be considered when determining whether a planned examination
or surgical procedure should proceed: current and projected
COVID-19 cases in the facility and region; supply of personal protective equipment (PPE), beds, ventilators, and staff in the facility and
system; health and age of the patients, especially given the risks of
SARS-CoV-2 infection during recovery; and urgency of the
procedure.5 Here, we highlight common procedures that should be
considered and provide a framework on which to base decisions
using the best available evidence. As this is a highly fluid situation,
it is likely that these recommendations will change based on emerging evidence, the infection burden, availability of the health care
workforce, and medical infrastructure.

General Considerations
General Care of Otolaryngologic Patients
Head and neck examinations are considered high risk in patients with
suspected or confirmed COVID-19; therefore, we recommend the
following guidelines. Depending on the current circumstances of the
local setting, such as the rate of community spread and case doubling time, routine, nonurgent appointments should be postponed
to limit the chance of SARS-CoV-2 infection of patients or health care
workers during their visit to the facility. This may include postponing appointments for patients with benign disease (eg, benign salivary or thyroid tumors, hyperparathyroidism) or patients undergoing routine surveillance visits after treatment for head and neck
cancer. In all instances, patients should be queried by telephone
about any new or concerning signs or symptoms that may suggest
disease recurrence and/or pending issues, such as severe dysphagia or airway compromise, as well as current symptoms suggestive
of COVID-19. Patients thought to be at risk for significant negative
outcomes without evaluation should be offered an in-person clinic
visit. Those with symptoms suggesting possible COVID-19 should be
directed to the appropriate self-care or triage mechanism. The use
of telephone, video, or telemedicine visits should be considered to
maintain relationships with patients and to support assessments that
can be made without an in-person physical examination. Only patients who need a thorough head and neck examination should be
seen in person.

Use of Powered Air-Purifying Respirators vs N95 Masks
In the literature, conflicting practices can be seen regarding the use
of N95 masks and tight-fitting goggles or the use of powered airpurifying respirators (PAPRs).6,7 PAPRs reduce the risk of exposure
more than N95 masks, but how much more they reduce the risk depends on the airflow setting. The assigned protection factor range
is 25 to 1000 for PAPRs and 10 for N95 masks.8 The most common
concern about using PAPRs is their effect on the sterile field during
surgery, as they do not filter the discharged air, but there are few
data on the infection risk compared with other methods or in combination with the use of a mask. Nearly as important, they are also
E2

cumbersome to use. They can limit visibility if they fog up, make using
a headlight impossible, and, if the hooded type is used, render the
use of a stethoscope impossible. Donning and doffing are opportunities for self-exposure. However, ill-fitting N95 masks also increase the risk of exposure and thus carry their own disadvantages. Decisions about which protection to use may depend on the
settings, risks, and logistics.9 Practicing the planned tasks in the use
of PAPRs if they are to be used is important.

The Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Physical
Examination and Associated Procedures
General Examination
Head and neck examination that will include the mucous membranes should be performed by maintaining the suggested level of
precaution (Table). The examination preferably should be performed in a separate room away from other patients, and only the
necessary personnel should be present. The examination should be
performed by the most experienced person present and might be
a more focused assessment, based on the judgment of the examining physician. Proper doffing and disposal of PPE are of utmost
importance.

Endoscopic Examinations of the Mucosa of the Head and Neck
Endoscopic examinations of the nose, sinuses, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx are among the most common head and neck diagnostic procedures and are routinely performed by a wide variety of
practitioners and trainees. They are considered aerosol-generating
procedures.10 Moreover, the nose and nasopharynx have been shown
to be reservoirs for high concentrations of the SARS-CoV-2 virus,11 and
after manipulation, viral particles have been shown to be airborne for
3 hours or more.12 Therefore, we recommend the same precautions
be adopted for mucosal surface endoscopic examinations of the head
and neck as for other aerosol-generating procedures.
Examinations should be limited to patients who have a clear indication and need. Again, the examination should be performed by
the most experienced personnel available in an expedient fashion.
Routine or lower-priority examinations should be deferred during
the pandemic. Patients should be placed in private rooms with negative pressure, if available, and the use of PPE should follow the guidance of the Table.
Specific recommendations additionally include the following:
1. In awake patients, adequate topical preparation to make the examination more comfortable is important. However, use of sprays
should be avoided. Carefully placed pledgets should be used to
provide decongestion and anesthesia.
2. Topical anesthesia for any office-based intervention of the larynx under the guidance of a laryngoscope or strobolaryngoscope is performed through application of a spray. This is considered high risk; therefore, office-based biopsy, injection, laser,
or other procedures should be delayed if possible.
3. If a video screen is available to project the examination, it should
be used to keep the patient’s and health care worker’s faces apart.
4. Disposable endoscopes may be considered.
5. After completion of the examination, the endoscope must be appropriately handled. The endoscope should not be removed from
the examination room without a protective cover.

JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery Published online March 31, 2020 (Reprinted)

© 2020 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 04/17/2020

jamaotolaryngology.com

Safety Recommendations for Evaluation and Surgery of the Head and Neck During the COVID-19 Pandemic

Special Communication Clinical Review & Education

Table. Summary of Head and Neck Examination and Procedure Recommendationsa
Risk and definition

Patient wears

Clinician/staff wear

High risk to clinician: any examination in:
• Patients with active SARS-CoV-2 infection
• Patients with influenzalike symptoms
• Patients under evaluation for SARS-CoV-2 infection

Surgical mask

• Single-use N95 mask
• Goggles or face shield
• Gown
• Gloves

Moderate risk to clinician: examination of ear, nose, mouth, or throat
in asymptomatic patients

Nothingb

• Surgical mask with face shield to allow for reuse of mask
• Gloves

Low risk to clinician: other examination in asymptomatic patients

Nothingb

• Mask optional
• Gloves

Nonprocedure encounters in non–immune-compromised patients

Aerosol-generating interventional procedures
Procedures including but not limited to the following: Intubation, extubation, office-based nasal and laryngeal endoscopy, bronchoscopy, gastrointestinal
endoscopy, drainage of peritonsillar abscess, placement of nasal packing, foreign body management in the nose or airway, tracheostomy, tracheostomy care,
powered instrumentation in mucosal head and neck surgery, possibly laparoscopic surgery
High risk to clinician: consider delaying or discussing the following:
• Patients with active SARS-CoV-2 infection
• Patients with influenzalike symptoms
• Patients under evaluation for SARS-CoV-2 infection

Surgical mask

• PAPR or single-use N95 mask and goggles or face shield
• Gown
• Double gloves

Low risk to clinician:
• Patients who are asymptomatic and untested or SARS-CoV-2
negative in 48 h preceding surgery
• If possible, test patients within 48 h of procedure

Nothingb

• N95 mask and eye protection (may be appropriate to reuse;
must use face shield to allow reuse)
• If unavailable, surgical mask with goggles or face shield
• Gown
• Double gloves

Non–aerosol-generating interventional procedures
Soft tissue surgery exposes blood, which can have a viral count, but unless the blood is aerosolized by the use of energy devices, it would be expected to be lower
risk. Suctioning away smoke and aerosolized tissue is recommended. To our knowledge, the infectiousness of aerosolized blood with SARS-CoV-2 is not yet known.
High risk to clinician: consider delaying or discussing in:
• Patients with active SARS-CoV-2 infection
• Patients with influenzalike symptoms
• Patients under evaluation for SARS-CoV-2 infection

Surgical mask

• Single-use N95 mask
• Goggles or face shield
• Gown
• Gloves

Low risk to clinician: patients who are asymptomatic
or SARS-CoV-2 negative in last 48 h

Nothingb

• Surgical mask
• Goggles or face shield
• Gown
• Gloves

Abbreviations: PAPR, powered air-purifying respirator; SARS, severe acute
respiratory syndrome; SARS-CoV-2, SARS coronavirus 2.
a

Adapted and updated with permission from Stanford Health Care.
Recommendations are subject to change as more data become available.

b

If the patient is immune compromised (receiving active chemotherapy,

Commonly Performed Otolaryngology Procedures
Procedures Commonly Performed
Outside the Operating Room
These inpatient, emergency department, and outpatient otolaryngology procedures should be handled differently during the pandemic. Adequate education of health care workers is essential. The
following are examples of procedures that in this setting are considered high risk:
• Routine suctioning of patients with a tracheotomy.
• Nasal packing placement, removal, or manipulation.
• Drainage of peritonsillar abscesses. Consider avoiding through the
use of antibiotic management or needle drainage instead of open
drainage.
• Attempted foreign body removal. Deferring may not be possible.
If the location is such that it will be particularly challenging to access in an awake patient or if the individual is particularly intolerant of manipulation, performing the removal under general anesthesia may be necessary.

Operative Procedures—General Considerations
A number of head and neck, otolaryngologic, and oral surgery procedures are high risk owing to exposure of airway and mucosal
jamaotolaryngology.com

radiotherapy, or immunotherapy; <1 y after solid organ transplant; receiving
chronic immunosuppression therapy; pregnant), both the patient and clinician
should wear a surgical mask unless the patient is high risk. Clinicians and staff
should wear a face shield over a surgical mask to allow reuse of the mask.

surfaces and the possibility of generating aerosols. During the pandemic, based on the guidelines of national and state authorities, all
elective procedures that can be safely postponed should be delayed. If an operative procedure involving the mucosa of the head
and neck is planned, the following considerations are recommended.
COVID-19 Status

If possible, determine the COVID-19 status of the patient beforehand. If a patient tests positive, a careful assessment of risk to the
patient and health care workers should be performed by a multidisciplinary team before the operation is recommended. Operating on mucosal surfaces in a patient who is actively infected generates a great risk for the entire operating room and recovery units
and may compromise the patient’s ability to recover from the
infection.
Operating Room Setting

High-risk operations or operations in patients with known COVID-19
should be performed in a designated operating room with negative pressures.13 Unprotected health care personnel should not be
allowed in a room where an aerosol-generating procedure is being
or has been conducted. If a patient is known or suspected to have
COVID-19, appropriate PPE must be worn by all.

(Reprinted) JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery Published online March 31, 2020

© 2020 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 04/17/2020

E3

Clinical Review & Education Special Communication

Safety Recommendations for Evaluation and Surgery of the Head and Neck During the COVID-19 Pandemic

High-Risk Procedures

Ear Surgery

Considering the high viral titers in nasal mucosal, oral, pharyngeal,
and pulmonary secretions, any operation that involves these surfaces is high risk to the entire operating room personnel. To our
knowledge, bloodborne transmission has not been documented, but
aerosolization of blood through the use of energy devices used for
control of bleeding and in dissection has been documented.14 These
procedures should be considered higher risk. This includes the use
of powered devices (eg, drills, microdebriders, saws) or ultrasonic
shears, such as the Harmonic scalpel (Ethicon) or Thunderbeat scalpel (Olympus).
If a high-risk operation is indicated during the pandemic in a
SARS-CoV-2–negative patient or a patient without symptoms or contact, appropriate PPE for all operating room staff is strongly recommended. Observed levels of community disease will not reflect the
full prevalence.

It is not known if the respiratory mucosa lining the middle ear and
mastoid air cell system is involved in COVID-19. But because the rest
of the airway is involved, it appears likely that the lining of the eustachian tube, middle ear, and mastoid air cell system are all
contaminated.18,19 Drilling through the mastoid creates droplets and
aerosols in significant clouds that, if the virus is present, could risk
infecting everyone in the operating room environment. As contaminated mists harbor viable virus for several hours, especially in enclosed spaces, caution is warranted. Mastoidectomy therefore is considered a high-risk procedure. Ideally, any patient undergoing any
ear surgery should be tested for COVID-19 preoperatively. If a patient is positive, surgery should be delayed until the patient has
cleared the disease.

Intubation and Extubation

In all operations, coordination with the anesthesia team is critical.
It is advisable that during intubation, all nonessential staff leave the
room and only return after the airway is secured. Additionally, all nonessential staff should be out of the room during extubation. Anybody who is present should maintain appropriate PPE. In some centers, an interval equivalent to known air exchange times for that
operating room is practiced before other personnel are allowed to
enter. Jet ventilation procedures pose a particularly high risk and
should be performed only under absolute necessity and with appropriate PPE, preferably in a negative-pressure room.
Patient Transport

Adequate protection during the transfer of SARS-CoV-2–positive
patients or patients of unknown infection status after a high-risk procedure is critical. Clear protocols should be established with the nursing staff, recovery unit personnel, anesthesia department, and infection control personnel. Nonintubated patients could be
transferred while wearing a surgical mask (not an N95 mask) if tolerated. If oxygen is required, it can be administered by face mask
over the surgical mask. Intubated patients should be transported with
an intensive care unit ventilator (dry circuit, filter in place) and not
with a bag-valve mask, which breaks the closed circuit. Appropriate PPE should be maintained by all health care workers participating in the transfer.

Operative Procedures—Specific Procedures and Scenarios
Endoscopic Sinonasal and Skull Base Surgery

Endoscopic nasal operations, including sinus surgery and transsphenoidal pituitary surgery, are very high-risk procedures. In general, these procedures should be postponed in patients with
COVID-19 or those who cannot be tested. In negative patients, PPE
for all operating room staff is recommended as per the Table.15
Thyroidectomy and Neck Procedures

Procedures that do not expose mucosal surfaces are lower risk, with
the caveat that the use of energy devices can result in aerosolization of the virus from the bloodstream or other gastrointestinal secretions. Patients with COVID-19 are likely to have the virus in their
bloodstream and feces, based on the experience with SARS, which
is also caused by a coronavirus.16,17
E4

Management of Facial Trauma

Management of trauma patients should be led by the trauma management team. Physicians who are called to assess trauma patients or perform specific procedures in areas of high community
spread should be equipped with adequate PPE based on the trauma
center policies. After following the trauma triage protocol, if assessment and treatment of facial trauma is needed, our recommendation is to treat patients of unknown COVID-19 status as COVID-19
positive. Lacerations that involve mucosal surfaces should be treated
as high risk. For injuries that require operative intervention (for example, reduction of fractures), the infection status of the patient
should be confirmed first and then definitive treatment initiated if
at all possible. In areas with significant shortage of medical capacity and personnel, nonoperative approaches should be considered
as much as medically acceptable.
Tracheostomy

Performing tracheostomy on patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 imposes unique challenges on not only otolaryngologists–head and neck surgeons but the entire health care team.20
In nonemergency situations, all cases should be reviewed by a multidisciplinary team, and the risks vs benefits of the procedure for the
patient and the entire health care team should be carefully assessed. Additionally, a detailed postprocedure care plan should be
established to ascertain the protection of other patients and health
care workers. The accompanying article by Tay et al6 outlines many
of these considerations. In general, most tracheostomy procedures should be avoided or delayed (even beyond 14 days) because of the high infectious risks of the procedure and subsequent
care until such time as the acute phase of infection has passed, when
the likelihood of recovery is high, and when ventilator weaning has
become the primary goal of care. Avoiding early tracheostomy in patients with COVID-19 is suggested because of the higher viral load
that may be present at this time. In addition, early tracheostomy was
not found to be associated with improved mortality or reduced
length of intensive care unit stay in a randomized clinical trial of patients on mechanical ventilation.21
We suggest the following additional guidelines:
1. Select the patients carefully. If the tracheostomy is assessed as
difficult because of anatomy, history, comorbidities, or other factors, consider postponing the procedure.
2. Consideration may be given to percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy if the patient’s anatomy and proceduralist expertise

JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery Published online March 31, 2020 (Reprinted)

© 2020 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 04/17/2020

jamaotolaryngology.com

Safety Recommendations for Evaluation and Surgery of the Head and Neck During the COVID-19 Pandemic

3.

4.

5.
6.

allow it to be done safely with minimal or no bronchoscopy, endotracheal suctioning, and disruption of the ventilator circuit.
Provide adequate sedation including paralysis to eliminate the
risk of coughing during the procedure. Ventilation should be
paused (apnea) at end-expiration when the trachea is entered and
any time the ventilation circuit is disconnected.
Choose a nonfenestrated, cuffed, tracheostomy tube on the
smaller side to make the tracheostomy hole smaller overall (Shiley
size 6 for both men and women is adequate). Keep the cuff
inflated to limit the spread of virus through the upper airway.
Perform tracheostomy suctioning using a closed suction system
with a viral filter.
Use a heat moisture exchanger device instead of tracheostomy collarduringweaningtopreventvirusspreadorreinfectionofpatients.

ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: March 24, 2020.
Published Online: March 31, 2020.
doi:10.1001/jamaoto.2020.0780
Author Affiliations: Department of
Otolaryngology, NYU Langone Health, New York,
New York (Givi); Department of Otolaryngology,
Montefiore Medical Center, New York, New York
(Schiff); Department of Otolaryngology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor (Chinn); Department of
Otolaryngology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland (Clayburgh); Department of
Head and Neck Surgery, Singapore General Hospital
and National Cancer Centre, Singapore (Iyer);
Department of Otolaryngology, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts
(Jalisi); Department of Otolaryngology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis (Moore,
Parker); Department of Otolaryngology, Louisiana
State University, Shreveport (Nathan); Department
of Otolaryngology, Stanford University, Palo Alto,
California (Orloff); Department of Otolaryngology,
Beaumont Hospital, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, Dublin, Ireland (O’Neill); Department of
Otolaryngology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
Ohio (Zender); Head and Neck Service, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York
(Morris); Department of Veterans Affairs, White
River Junction, Vermont (Davies).
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Morris
reported receiving grants from Illumina, Inc. and
AstraZeneca outside the submitted work. No other
disclosures were reported.
Additional Contributions: We thank our physician,
nursing, advanced practice provider, respiratory
therapy, administrative, and environmental services
colleagues for their extraordinary professionalism
and dedication. We gratefully acknowledge the
expertise provided by colleagues around the world,
including Dr Hui Chen (Department of
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, Eye and
ENT Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China),
Dr Filippo Marchi (Department of
Otorhinolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery,
Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy), Dr Giacomo Sollini
(Department of Otorhinolaryngology–Head and
Neck Surgery, Ospedale Bellaria, Bologna, Italy),
Dr Nevill Shine (Department of Otolaryngology–
Head and Neck Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons
in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland), Dr Jason Y.K. Chan
(Department of Otorhinolaryngology–Head and

jamaotolaryngology.com

Special Communication Clinical Review & Education

7. Avoid changing the tracheostomy tube until viral load is as low
as possible.

Conclusions
We acknowledge that these challenging times require extraordinary efforts. Maintaining the health and strength of our clinical workforce is critical to avoiding collapse of our health care system. However, the experience of our colleagues in Singapore and Hong Kong
in protecting their health care workers is quite reassuring.22 By
following carefully planned routines and procedures, we will be
able to provide excellent care and help protect the safety and health
of our colleagues.

Neck Surgery, Chinese University of Hong Kong),
Dr Woei Shyang Loh (Department of
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, National
University Hospital, Singapore), and Drs Mini
Kamboj, Richard Wong, and Robert Lee (Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York).
REFERENCES
1. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, et al. Clinical characteristics
of 138 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel
coronavirus-infected pneumonia in Wuhan, China
[published online February 7, 2020]. JAMA.
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.1585
2. Moore D, Gamage B, Bryce E, Copes R, Yassi A;
BC Interdisciplinary Respiratory Protection Study
Group. Protecting health care workers from SARS
and other respiratory pathogens: organizational
and individual factors that affect adherence to
infection control guidelines. Am J Infect Control.
2005;33(2):88-96. doi:10.1016/j.ajic.2004.11.003
3. Ng K, Poon BH, Kiat Puar TH, et al. COVID-19 and
the risk to health care workers: a case report. Ann
Intern Med. 2020. doi:10.7326/L20-0175
4. ENT UK. Guidance for ENT during the COVID-19
pandemic. Accessed March 23, 2020. https://www.
entuk.org/guidance-ent-during-covid-19-pandemic
5. Siddiqui S. CMS adult elective surgery and
procedures recommendations [version 3.15.20].
Accessed March 23, 2020. https://www.cms.gov/
files/document/31820-cms-adult-elective-surgeryand-procedures-recommendations.pdf
6. Tay JK, Khoo ML-C, Loh WS. Surgical
considerations for tracheostomy during the
COVID-19 pandemic: lessons learned from the
severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak
[published online March 31, 2020]. JAMA
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. doi:10.1001/jamaoto.
2020.0764
7. Roberts V. To PAPR or not to PAPR? Can J Respir
Ther. 2014;50(3):87-90.
8. Institute of Medicine. The Use and Effectiveness
of Powered Air Purifying Respirators in Health Care:
Workshop Summary. National Academies Press; 2015.
9. Wax RS, Christian MD. Practical
recommendations for critical care and
anesthesiology teams caring for novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) patients [published online February
12, 2020]. Can J Anaesth. doi:10.1007/s12630-02001591-x

10. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Interim infection prevention and control
recommendations for patients with suspected or
confirmed coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in
healthcare settings. Accessed March 23, 2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
infection-control/control-recommendations.html
11. Zou L, Ruan F, Huang M, et al. SARS-CoV-2 viral
load in upper respiratory specimens of infected
patients. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(12):1177-1179.
doi:10.1056/NEJMc2001737
12. van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH,
et al. Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as
compared with SARS-CoV-1 [published online
March 17, 2020]. N Engl J Med. doi:10.1056/
NEJMc2004973
13. American College of Surgeons. COVID-19:
guidance for triage of non-emergent surgical
procedures. Accessed March 23, 2020. https://
www.facs.org/covid-19/clinical-guidance/triage
14. Zheng MH, Boni L, Fingerhut A. Minimally
invasive surgery and the novel coronavirus
outbreak: lessons learned in China and Italy
[published online March 15, 2020]. Ann Surg.
Accessed March 23, 2020. https://journals.lww.com/
annalsofsurgery/Documents/Minimally%
20invasive%20surgery%20and%20the%20novel
%20coronavirus%20outbreak%20-%20lessons
%20learned%20in%20China%20and%20Italy.
pdf
15. Patel ZM, Hwang PH, Nayak JV, et al.
[Statement from Stanford University School of
Medicine Departments of Otolaryngology–Head
and Neck Surgery and Neurosurgery]. Accessed
March 23, 2020. https://www.docdroid.net/
AyUBOji/covid-19-information.pdf
16. Isakbaeva ET, Khetsuriani N, Beard RS, et al;
SARS Investigation Group. SARS-associated
coronavirus transmission, United States. Emerg
Infect Dis. 2004;10(2):225-231. doi:10.3201/
eid1002.030734
17. Ding Y, He L, Zhang Q, et al. Organ distribution
of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in SARS
patients: implications for pathogenesis and virus
transmission pathways. J Pathol. 2004;203(2):622630. doi:10.1002/path.1560
18. Pitkäranta A, Virolainen A, Jero J, Arruda E,
Hayden FG. Detection of rhinovirus, respiratory
syncytial virus, and coronavirus infections in acute
otitis media by reverse transcriptase polymerase

(Reprinted) JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery Published online March 31, 2020

© 2020 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 04/17/2020

E5

Clinical Review & Education Special Communication

chain reaction. Pediatrics. 1998;102(2, pt 1):291-295.
doi:10.1542/peds.102.2.291

online March 11, 2020]. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.
2020.3633

19. Heikkinen T, Thint M, Chonmaitree T.
Prevalence of various respiratory viruses in the
middle ear during acute otitis media. N Engl J Med.
1999;340(4):260-264. doi:10.1056/
NEJM199901283400402

21. Young D, Harrison DA, Cuthbertson BH, Rowan
K; TracMan Collaborators. Effect of early vs late
tracheostomy placement on survival in patients
receiving mechanical ventilation: the TracMan
randomized trial. JAMA. 2013;309(20):2121-2129.
doi:10.1001/jama.2013.5154

20. Murthy S, Gomersall CD, Fowler RA. Care for
critically ill patients with COVID-19 [published

E6

Safety Recommendations for Evaluation and Surgery of the Head and Neck During the COVID-19 Pandemic

22. Gawande A. Keeping the coronavirus from
infecting health-care workers: what Singapore’s and
Hong Kong’s success is teaching us about the
pandemic. The New Yorker. March 21, 2020.
Accessed March 23, 2020. https://www.newyorker.
com/news/news-desk/keeping-the-coronavirusfrom-infecting-health-care-workers

JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery Published online March 31, 2020 (Reprinted)

© 2020 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 04/17/2020

jamaotolaryngology.com

