SARS‑CoV‑2 and COVID‑19: The most important research questions
Kit‑San Yuen1, Zi ‑Wei Ye2, Sin‑Yee Fung1, Chi‑Ping Chan1 and Dong‑Yan Jin1*

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is
an ongoing global health emergency. Here we highlight nine most important research questions concerning virus
transmission, asymptomatic and presymptomatic virus shedding, diagnosis, treatment, vaccine development, origin
of virus and viral pathogenesis.
Keywords: SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), Novel coronavirus pneumonia (NCP)
The 2019-nCoV causes an ongoing outbreak of lower
respiratory tract disease called novel coronavirus pneumonia (NCP) by the Chinese government initially.
The disease name was subsequently recommended as
COVID-19 by the World Health Organization. Meanwhile, 2019-nCoV was renamed SARS-CoV-2 by the
International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. As
of February 24, 2020, more than 80,000 confirmed cases
including more than 2,700 deaths have been reported
worldwide, affecting at least 37 countries. The WHO
has declared this a global health emergency at the end of
January 2020. The epicenter of this ongoing outbreak is
in the city of Wuhan in Hubei Province of central China
and the Huanan seafood wholesale market was thought
to be at least one of the places where SARS-CoV-2 from
an unknown animal source might have crossed the species barrier to infect humans.
A pioneering study conducted in the city of Shenzhen
near Hong Kong by a group of clinicians and scientists
from the University of Hong Kong has provided the first
concrete evidence for human-to-human transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 [1]. This is an excellent example of how a
high-quality clinical study can make a major difference
*Correspondence: dyjin@hku.hk

in policy setting. Several important clinical features of
COVID-19 have also been documented in this study.
First, an attack rate of 83% within the family context is
alarmingly high, indicating the high transmissibility
of SARS-CoV-2. Second, the clinical manifestations of
COVID-19 in this family range from mild to moderate,
with more systematic symptoms and more severe radiological abnormalities seen in older patients. Generally,
COVID-19 appears to be less severe than SARS. Third,
an asymptomatic child was found to have ground-glass
opacities in his lung and SARS-CoV-2 RNA in his sputum sample. This finding of asymptomatic virus shedding
raises the possibility for transmission of SARS-CoV-2
from asymptomatic carriers to others, which is later confirmed by others [2]. Finally, the presentation of diarrhea
in two young adults from the same family also suggests
the possibility for gastrointestinal involvement in SARSCoV-2 infection and fecal–oral transmission. The study
has set the stage for the control and management of
COVID-19 [1]. The work was completed timely and the
investigators showed great courage and leadership in a
very difficult time when the Chinese authority failed to
recognize widespread person-to-person transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 before January 20, 2020.
Several interesting papers on SARS-CoV-2 and
COVID-19 have been published in the past few weeks
to report on the evolutionary reservoir [3], possible intermediate host [4] and genomic sequence [5] of

SARS-CoV-2 as well as clinical characteristics of COVID19 [6, 7]. In view of these findings and the urgent needs in
the prevention and control of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID19, in this commentary we highlight the most important research questions in the field from our personal
perspectives.
The first question concerns how SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted currently in the epicenter of Wuhan. In order
to minimize the spreading of SARS-CoV-2, China has
locked down Wuhan and nearby cities since January 23,
2020. The unprecedented control measures including
suspension of all urban transportation have apparently
been successful in preventing further spreading of SARSCoV-2 to other cities. However, the number of confirmed
cases in Wuhan continued to rise. It is therefore crucial
to determine whether the rise is due to a large number of infected individuals before the lock down and/
or failure in the prevention of widespread intra-familial,
nosocomial or community transmission. Based on the
number of exported cases from Wuhan to cities outside
of mainland China, it was predicted that there might be
more than 70,000 individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2
on January 25, 2020 in Wuhan [8]. This should be determined experimentally in Wuhan as discussed below and
it will reveal whether the real numbers of infected people
and asymptomatic carriers are indeed underestimated
severely. In addition to viral RNA detection, measurement of IgM and IgG antibodies as well as antigens
would be very helpful. Several representative residential
areas should be selected for detailed analysis so that a
big picture can be deduced. The analysis should include
all healthy and diseased individuals within the area with
the aim of identifying people who have recovered from
an infection or are having an active infection. The ratio
of asymptomatic carriers should also be determined. The
analysis should also be extended to detect RNA and antigen of influenza viruses. The activity of seasonal flu in
Wuhan also reached a peak at the beginning of 2020. It
will be of interest to see whether the flu season had ended
and how many people having a fever now are actually
infected with influenza virus. Precision control measures
for SARS-CoV-2 should be tailor-designed for high-risk
groups based on the results of this analysis. Differentiating people having a flu and preventing them from infecting with SARS-CoV-2 in a hospital setting might also be
critical.
The second question is how transmissible and pathogenic is SARS-CoV-2 in tertiary and quaternary
spreading within humans. Continued transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan suggests that tertiary and quaternary spreading has occurred. Compared to the primary
and secondary spreading during which SARS-CoV-2 was
transmitted from animal to human and from human to

human, has the transmission rate increased and has the
pathogenicity decreased? Alternatively, is the virus less
transmissible after several passages in humans? Retrospective analysis of all confirmed cases in Wuhan should
be very informative. The answers to the above questions hold the key to the outcome of the outbreak. If the
transmission is weakened, the outbreak may ultimately
come to an end at which SARS-CoV-2 is eradicated from
humans. On the contrary, if effective transmission can be
sustained, the chance is increased that SARS-CoV-2 will
become another community-acquired human coronavirus just like the other four human coronaviruses (229E,
OC43, HKU1 and NL63) causing common cold only.
The basic reproductive number ­(R0) of SARS-CoV-2 has
been estimated to be 2.68, resulting in an epidemic doubling time of about 6.4 days [8]. Other estimates of R
­0
could go up to 4, higher than that of SARS-CoV, which is
lower than 2. Determining the real R
­ 0 will shed light on
whether and to what extent infection control measures
are effective.
The third question relates to the importance of asymptomatic and presymptomatic virus shedding in SARSCoV-2 transmission. Asymptomatic and presymptomatic
virus shedding posts a big challenge to infection control [1, 2]. In addition, patients with mild and unspecific
symptoms are also difficult to identify and quarantine.
Notably, the absence of fever in SARS-CoV-2 infection
(12.1%) is more frequent than in SARS-CoV (1%) and
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERSCoV; 2%) infection [6]. In light of this, the effectiveness of
using fever detection as the surveillance method should
be reviewed. However, based on previous studies of
influenza viruses and community-acquired human coronaviruses, the viral loads in asymptomatic carriers are
relatively low [9]. If this is also the case for SARS-CoV-2,
the risk should remain low. Studies on the natural history
of SARS-CoV-2 infection in humans are urgently needed.
Identifying a cohort of asymptomatic carriers in Wuhan
and following their viral loads, clinical presentations and
antibody titers over a time course will provide clues as to
how many of the subjects have symptoms in a later phase,
whether virus shedding from the subjects is indeed less
robust, and how often they might transmit SARS-CoV-2
to others.
The fourth question relates to the importance of
fecal–oral route in SARS-CoV-2 transmission. In addition to transmission via droplets and close contact,
fecal–oral transmission of SARS-CoV has been shown
to be important in certain circumstances. Gastrointestinal involvement of SARS-CoV-2 infection and isolation of SARS-CoV-2 from fecal samples of patients are in
support of the importance of fecal–oral route in SARSCoV-2 transmission. Although diarrhea was rarely seen in
studies with large cohorts [6, 7], the possibility of SARSCoV-2 transmission via sewage, waste, contaminated
water, air condition system and aerosols cannot be underestimated, particularly in cases such as the Diamond
Princess cruise ship with 3,700 people, among whom at
least 742 have been confirmed to be infected with SARSCoV-2 plausibly as the result of a superspreading event.
Further investigations are required to determine the role
of fecal–oral transmission in these cases and within the
representative residential areas selected for detailed epidemiological studies in Wuhan as discussed earlier.
The fifth question concerns how COVID-19 should be
diagnosed and what diagnostic reagents should be made
available. RT-PCR-based SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection
in respiratory samples provides the only specific diagnostic test at the initial phase of the outbreak. It has
played a very critical role in early detection of patients
infected with SARS-CoV-2 outside of Wuhan, implicating that widespread infection of the virus had occurred
in Wuhan at least as early as the beginning of 2020. This
has also pushed the Chinese authority to acknowledge
the severity of the situation. Due to difficulties in sampling and other technical issues in this test, at one point
in early February clinically diagnosed patients with typical ground glass lung opacities in chest CT were also
counted as confirmed cases in order to have the patients
identified and quarantined as early as possible. ELISA
kits for detection of IgM and IgG antibodies against N
and other SARS-CoV-2 proteins have also been available
more recently. This has made specific diagnosis of ongoing and past infection possible. Particularly, seroconversion for IgM antibodies normally occurs a few days
earlier than that of IgG. ELISA reagents for detection of
SARS-CoV-2 antigens such as S and N are still in urgent
need, and would provide another test highly complementary to viral RNA detection.
The sixth question concerns how COVID-19 should
be treated and what treatment options should be made
available. COVID-19 is a self-limiting disease in more
than 80% of patients. Severe pneumonia occurred in
about 15% of cases as revealed in studies with large
cohorts of patients. The gross case fatality is 3.4% worldwide as of February 25, 2020. This rate is 4.4% for patients
in Wuhan, 4.0% for patients in Hubei and 0.92% for
patients outside of Hubei. The exceedingly high fatality
in Wuhan might be explained by the collapse of hospitals, a large number of undiagnosed patients, suboptimal
treatment or a combination of these. Up to date, we still
do not have any specific anti-SARS-CoV-2 agents but an
anti-Ebola drug, remdesivir, may hold the promise. As a
nucleotide analog, remdesivir was shown to be effective
in preventing MERS-CoV replication in monkeys. Severity of disease, viral replication, and lung damage were
reduced when the drug was administered either before or
after infection with MERS-CoV [10]. These results provide the basis for a rapid test of the beneficial effects of
remdesivir in COVID-19. Other antiviral agents worthy
of further clinical investigations include ribavirin, protease inhibitors lopinavir and ritonavir, interferon α2b,
interferon β, chloroquine phosphate, and Arbidol. However, we should also bear in mind the side effects of these
antiviral agents. For example, type I interferons including interferon α2b and interferon β are well known for
their antiviral activity. Their beneficial effects at an early
phase of infection are well expected. However, administration at a later stage carries the risk that they might
worsen the cytokine storm and exacerbate inflammation.
Notably, steroids have been experimentally used widely
in the treatment of SARS and are still preferred by some
Chinese physicians in the treatment of COVID-19. It is
said to be capable of stopping the cytokine storm and
preventing lung fibrosis. However, the window in which
steroids might be beneficial to patients with COVID19 is very narrow. In other words, steroids can only be
used when SARS-CoV-2 has already been eliminated by
human immune response. Otherwise, SARS-CoV-2 replication will be boosted leading to exacerbation of symptoms, substantial virus shedding, as well as increased risk
for nosocomial transmission and secondary infection. In
this regard, it will be of interest to determine whether the
report of fungal infection in the lungs of some patients
in Wuhan might be linked to misuse of steroids. Nevertheless, the screening of new pharmaceuticals, smallmolecule compounds and other agents that have potent
anti-SARS-CoV-2 effects will successfully derive new and
better lead compounds and agents that might prove useful in the treatment of COVID-19.
The seventh question is whether inactivated vaccines
are a viable option for SARS-CoV-2. The chance that
SARS-CoV-2 will become endemic in some areas or even
pandemic has increased in view of its high transmissibility, asymptomatic and presymptomatic virus shedding,
high number of patients with mild symptoms, as well as
the evidence for superspreading events. Thus, vaccine
development becomes necessary for prevention and ultimate eradication of SARS-CoV-2. Inactivated vaccines
are one major type of conventional vaccines that could be
easily produced and quickly developed. In this approach,
SARS-CoV-2 virions can be chemically and/or physically
inactivated to elicit neutralizing antibodies. In the case
of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, neutralizing antibodies
were successfully and robustly induced by an inactivated
vaccine in all types of animal experiments, but there are
concerns about antibody-dependent enhancement of
viral infection and other safety issues. While inactivated
vaccines should still be tested, alternative approaches
include live attenuated vaccines, subunit vaccines and
vectored vaccines. All of these merit further investigations and tests in animals.
The eighth question relates to the origins of SARSCoV-2 and COVID-19. To make a long story short, two
parental viruses of SARS-CoV-2 have now been identified. The first one is bat coronavirus RaTG13 found in
Rhinolophus affinis from Yunnan Province and it shares
96.2% overall genome sequence identity with SARSCoV-2 [3]. However, RaTG13 might not be the immediate ancestor of SARS-CoV-2 because it is not predicted
to use the same ACE2 receptor used by SARS-CoV-2 due
to sequence divergence in the receptor-binding domain
sharing 89% identity in amino acid sequence with that of
SARS-CoV-2. The second one is a group of betacoronaviruses found in the endangered species of small mammals
known as pangolins [4], which are often consumed as a
source of meat in southern China. They share about 90%
overall nucleotide sequence identity with SARS-CoV-2
but carries a receptor-binding domain predicted to interact with ACE2 and sharing 97.4% identity in amino acid
sequence with that of SARS-CoV-2. They are closely
related to both SARS-CoV-2 and RaTG13, but apparently they are unlikely the immediate ancestor of SARSCoV-2 in view of the sequence divergence over the whole
genome. Many hypotheses involving recombination, convergence and adaptation have been put forward to suggest a probable evolutionary pathway for SARS-CoV-2,
but none is supported by direct evidence. The jury is still
out as to what animals might serve as reservoir and intermediate hosts of SARS-CoV-2. Although Huanan seafood
wholesale market was suggested as the original source of
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19, there is evidence for the
involvement of other wild animal markets in Wuhan. In
addition, the possibility for a human superspreader in the
Huanan market has not been excluded. Further investigations are required to shed light on the origins of SARSCoV-2 and COVID-19.
The ninth question concerns why SARS-CoV-2 is less
pathogenic. If the reduced pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2
is the result of adaptation to humans, it will be of great
importance to identify the molecular basis of this adaptation. The induction of a cytokine storm is the root cause
of pathogenic inflammation both in SARS and COVID19. SARS-CoV is known to be exceedingly potent in the
suppression of antiviral immunity and the activation of
proinflammatory response. It is therefore intriguing to
see how SARS-CoV-2 might be different from SARS-CoV
in interferon-antagonizing and inflammasome-activating
properties. It is noteworthy that some interferon antagonists and inflammasome activators encoded by SARSCoV are not conserved in SARS-CoV-2. Particularly,
ORF3 and ORF8 in SARS-CoV-2 are highly divergent
from ORF3a and ORF8b in SARS-CoV that are known
to induce NLRP3 inflammasome activation. ORF3 of
SARS-CoV-2 is also significantly different from the interferon antagonist ORF3b of SARS-CoV. Thus, these viral
proteins of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 should be compared for their abilities to modulate antiviral and proinflammatory responses. The hypothesis that SARS-CoV-2
might be less efficient in the suppression of antiviral
response and the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome
should be tested experimentally.
Much progress has been made in the surveillance and
control of infectious diseases in China after the outbreak
of SARS-CoV in 2003. Meanwhile, virological research
in the country has also been strengthened. The new disease report and surveillance system did function relatively well during the 2009 pandemic of swine flu. New
viral pathogens such as avian influenza virus H7N9 and
severe-fever-with-thrombocytopenia syndrome bunyavirus have also been discovered in recent years [11,
12], indicating the strength and vigor of Chinese infectious disease surveillance and virological research. However, the ongoing outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 has not only
caused significant morbidity and mortality in China, but
also revealed major systematic problems in control and
prevention of infectious diseases there. Unfortunately,
many of the lessons from the 2003 outbreak have not
been learned. Importantly, disease control professionals,
practicing physicians and scientists are disconnected in
the fight against SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. In addition, important decisions were not made by experts in
the field. Hopefully, these issues will be dealt with swiftly
and decisively during and after the outbreak.
Above we have discussed the two possibilities that this
outbreak will unfold. If SARS-CoV-2 is not eliminated
from humans through quarantine and other measures, it
can still be eradicated by vaccination. If it attenuates to
become another community-acquired human coronavirus causing mild respiratory tract disease resembling the
other four human coronaviruses associated with common
cold, it will not be a disaster either. Before SARS-CoV-2
attenuates further to a much less virulent form, early
diagnosis and improved treatment of severe cases hold
the key to reduce mortality. We should remain vigilant,
but there are grounds for guarded optimism. Redoubling
our research efforts on SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 will
solidify the scientific basis on which important decisions
are made.
Acknowledgements
We thank Pearl Chan, Hinson Cheung, Terence Lee and Kam-Leung Siu for
critical reading of the manuscript.
Authors’ contributions
KSY and DYJ wrote the manuscript with inputs from ZWY, SYF and CPC. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
