Short hairpin RNAs targeting M and N genes reduce replication of porcine deltacoronavirus in ST cells
Wen‑yuan Gu1,2 · Yan Li1 · Bao‑jing Liu1 · Jing Wang1 · Guang‑fu Yuan1 · Shao‑jie Chen1 · Yu‑Zhu Zuo1 · Jing‑Hui Fan1

Porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV) is a recently identified coronavirus that causes intestinal diseases in neonatal piglets
with diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration, and post-infection mortality of 50–100%. Currently, there are no effective treatments
or vaccines available to control PDCoV. To study the potential of RNA interference (RNAi) as a strategy against PDCoV
infection, two short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-expressing plasmids (pGenesil-M and pGenesil-N) that targeted the M and N
genes of PDCoV were constructed and transfected separately into swine testicular (ST) cells, which were then infected with
PDCoV strain HB-BD. The potential of the plasmids to inhibit PDCoV replication was evaluated by cytopathic effect, virus
titers, and real-time quantitative RT-PCR assay. The cytopathogenicity assays demonstrated that pGenesil-M and pGenesilN protected ST cells against pathological changes with high specificity and efficacy. The 50% tissue culture infective dose
showed that the PDCoV titers in ST cells treated with pGenesil-M and pGenesil-N were reduced 13.2- and 32.4-fold,
respectively. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR also confirmed that the amount of viral RNA in cell cultures pre-transfected
with pGenesil-M and pGenesil-N was reduced by 45.8 and 56.1%, respectively. This is believed to be the first report to show
that shRNAs targeting the M and N genes of PDCoV exert antiviral effects in vitro, which suggests that RNAi is a promising
new strategy against PDCoV infection.
Keywords Porcine deltacoronavirus · RNA interference · Short hairpin RNA · Nucleocapsidgene · Swine testicular cells

Introduction
Porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV) is a new member of the
Deltacoronavirus genus Coronavirus that causes intestinal
disease. Clinical symptoms include vomiting, diarrhea,

coronavirus has been detected in Canada, South Korea,
Thailand, Mexico, and China [3, 6–8]. PDCoV has become
an important pathogen affecting healthy development in the
pig industry. However, there are currently no vaccines or
treatments that can effectively control PDCoV [6].
PDCoV is an enveloped, single-stranded, and positivesense RNA virus. The entire genome contains about 25,400
nucleotides [4]. PDCoV has four major structural proteins:
spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid
(N) [1, 2, 9]. The detailed function of each PDCoV proteins
is unknown. According to studies on other coronaviruses, M
protein is the most abundant component of the viral envelope. It plays an important role in viral assembly process
and budding [10, 11]. The M protein can also induce production of protective antibodies [10, 12]. The N protein of
the coronavirus forms a helical nucleocapsid with genomic
RNA and protects the viral genome from external interference [13, 14].
RNA interference (RNAi) is a process that effectively
silences or inhibits the expression of a gene of interest,
which is achieved by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), which

selectively inactivates the mRNA of the target gene. RNAi
has been successfully used in infection inhibition studies
of animal viruses, such as porcine epidemic diarrhea virus
(PEDV) [15], influenza virus A [16], porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) [17], and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus [18]. However,
whether RNAi inhibits the replication of PDCoV has not
been reported.
RNAi interferes with viral replication through short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) or small interfering RNAs (siRNAs).
shRNA is more stable, long-lasting, and more efficient than
siRNA. Therefore, in this study, we constructed two shRNAs
(pGenesil-M and pGenesil-N) in a plasmid expression system that targeted the M and N genes of PDCoV, and investigated the efficiency of shRNA-mediated RNAi of PDCoV
replication in vitro.

siRNA​). Using the BLAST program, the candidate shRNA
sequences were aligned with the pig genome and other
PDCoV sequences submitted to GenBank, and the specific
strong shRNAs were selected. To ensure a similar RNAi
effect on different PDCoV strains, two theoretically effective
sequences at nucleotide positions 328–346 (M) and 270–288
(N) were selected. dsDNA sequences encoding the shRNAs
were synthesized, with 4-nt 5′ single-stranded overhangs
complementary to BamHI and HindIII-cleaved DNA at the
ends. Scrambled siRNA sequences were designed as negative controls (NC). The sequences are shown in Table 1.
Each ds-shRNA-coding sequence was ligated into the
BamHI and HindIII restriction sites of the shRNA expression vector pGenesil-1 (Wuhan Genesil Biotechnology,
China) and transformed into Escherichia coli competent
cells. The recombinant plasmids were named pGenesil-M,
pGenesil-N, and pGenesil-NC.
