Small-Molecule Antiviral ␤-D-N4-Hydroxycytidine Inhibits a Proofreading-Intact Coronavirus with a High Genetic Barrier to Resistance

Coronaviruses (CoVs) have emerged from animal reservoirs to cause severe and lethal disease in humans, but there are currently no FDA-approved antivirals to treat the infections. One class of antiviral compounds, nucleoside analogues,
mimics naturally occurring nucleosides to inhibit viral replication. While these compounds have been successful therapeutics for several viral infections, mutagenic nucleoside analogues, such as ribavirin and 5-ﬂuorouracil, have been ineffective at inhibiting CoVs. This has been attributed to the proofreading activity of the viral 3=-5=
exoribonuclease (ExoN). ␤-D-N4-Hydroxycytidine (NHC) (EIDD-1931; Emory Institute
for Drug Development) has recently been reported to inhibit multiple viruses. Here,
we demonstrate that NHC inhibits both murine hepatitis virus (MHV) (50% effective
concentration [EC50] ⫽ 0.17 ␮M) and Middle East respiratory syndrome CoV (MERSCoV) (EC50 ⫽ 0.56 ␮M) with minimal cytotoxicity. NHC inhibited MHV lacking ExoN
proofreading activity similarly to wild-type (WT) MHV, suggesting an ability to evade
or overcome ExoN activity. NHC inhibited MHV only when added early during infection, decreased viral speciﬁc infectivity, and increased the number and proportion of
G:A and C:U transition mutations present after a single infection. Low-level NHC resistance was difﬁcult to achieve and was associated with multiple transition mutations across the genome in both MHV and MERS-CoV. These results point to a virusmutagenic mechanism of NHC inhibition in CoVs and indicate a high genetic barrier
to NHC resistance. Together, the data support further development of NHC for treatment of CoVs and suggest a novel mechanism of NHC interaction with the CoV replication complex that may shed light on critical aspects of replication.
IMPORTANCE The emergence of coronaviruses (CoVs) into human populations from

animal reservoirs has demonstrated their epidemic capability, pandemic potential,
and ability to cause severe disease. However, no antivirals have been approved to
treat these infections. Here, we demonstrate the potent antiviral activity of a broadspectrum ribonucleoside analogue, ␤-D-N4-hydroxycytidine (NHC), against two divergent CoVs. Viral proofreading activity does not markedly impact sensitivity to NHC
inhibition, suggesting a novel interaction between a nucleoside analogue inhibitor
and the CoV replicase. Further, passage in the presence of NHC generates only lowlevel resistance, likely due to the accumulation of multiple potentially deleterious
transition mutations. Together, these data support a mutagenic mechanism of inhibition by NHC and further support the development of NHC for treatment of CoV infections.
December 2019 Volume 93 Issue 24 e01348-19

he emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2002 and Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 2012 has underscored the ability of coronaviruses
(CoVs) to cause lethal disease in humans (1, 2). MERS-CoV continues to infect humans
in the Middle East, and four additional human CoVs (HCoVs), HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63,
HCoV-OC43, and HCoV-HKU1, continue to circulate globally and cause respiratory
disease (3–6). The continued circulation in bat populations of SARS- and MERS- like
CoVs that can replicate efﬁciently in primary human airway cells further demonstrates
the potential for CoVs to emerge and cause severe disease in the future (7–10). While
SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV outbreaks have been controlled, largely through public
health measures (11–13), the potential for future outbreaks highlights the need for safe
and effective therapeutics to combat CoV infections. There are currently no approved
therapeutics or vaccines for any human CoV infection. Previous efforts to treat CoV
infections with existing antivirals did not conclusively beneﬁt clinical outcomes; thus,
the current standard of care remains mostly supportive (14–16).
Several targets for direct-acting antivirals are being investigated to treat CoV
infections (17–19). Because the viral replication machinery performs an essential role in
genome replication, therapeutics approved to treat multiple different viral infections
are aimed at this target (20). Many approved antivirals are classiﬁed as nucleoside
analogues, compounds that mimic natural nucleosides to inhibit viral replication (21).
Inhibition by nucleoside analogues can be accomplished through a variety of mechanisms. Common mechanisms of action include incorporation of the analogue by the
viral polymerase to induce premature termination of strand synthesis and loss of
essential genetic information through mutagenesis (22–25). A previous study reported
that the nucleoside analogues ribavirin (RBV) and 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) did not potently
inhibit CoVs, and this ﬁnding was attributed to the proofreading capabilities of the viral
3=-5= exoribonuclease (ExoN) (26). Recent reports have demonstrated the inhibition of
wild-type (WT) CoVs by nucleoside analogues such as galidesivir (BCX4430) and remdesivir (GS-5734) (27–29). While these compounds have shown efﬁcacy against CoVs,
administration of multiple compounds simultaneously may be required to effectively
treat CoV infections and control the emergence of drug resistance, as has been
demonstrated for other viral infections (30).
␤-D-N4-Hydroxycytidine (NHC) (EIDD-1931; Emory Institute for Drug Development), a
cytidine analogue, has recently been shown to inhibit multiple viruses, including
chikungunya virus, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV), respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV), hepatitis C virus, norovirus, inﬂuenza A (IAV) and B viruses, and Ebola virus
(31–36). Previous reports have demonstrated increased introduction of transition mutations in viral genomes after treatment, as well as a high genetic barrier to resistance
(31, 36). Antiviral activity of NHC has also been reported against the human ␣-CoV
HCoV-NL63, as well as the ␤-CoV SARS-CoV (43, 44). Neither the NHC mechanism of
action nor NHC resistance has been described for any CoV to date.
In this study, we investigated NHC inhibition and resistance in two divergent
␤-CoVs, murine hepatitis virus (MHV) and MERS-CoV. We show that NHC potently
inhibits WT MHV and MERS-CoV with minimal cytotoxicity. We also demonstrate that
MHV ExoN proofreading activity has a limited but measurable effect on sensitivity to
NHC. We observed an NHC inhibition proﬁle consistent with a mutagenic mechanism
of action featuring an accumulation of transition mutations, indicative of a high genetic
barrier to resistance.
RESULTS
NHC inhibits MHV and MERS-CoV replication with minimal cytotoxicity. NHC
(Fig. 1) has potent broad-spectrum antiviral activity against many RNA viral families
(31–36). We ﬁrst determined if NHC also inhibits CoV replication, using a dose-response
December 2019 Volume 93 Issue 24 e01348-19
