Structures of MERS-CoV spike glycoprotein in complex with sialoside attachment receptors
Young-Jun Park1,5, Alexandra C. Walls1,5, Zhaoqian Wang1,5, Maximillian M. Sauer1, Wentao Li2,
M. Alejandra Tortorici 1,3,4, Berend-Jan Bosch2, Frank DiMaio1 and David Veesler 1*
The Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) causes severe and often lethal respiratory illness in humans,
and no vaccines or specific treatments are available. Infections are initiated via binding of the MERS-CoV spike (S) glycoprotein to sialosides and dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 (the attachment and entry receptors, respectively). To understand MERS-CoV
engagement of sialylated receptors, we determined the cryo-EM structures of S in complex with 5-N-acetyl neuraminic acid,
5-N-glycolyl neuraminic acid, sialyl-LewisX, α2,3-sialyl-N-acetyl-lactosamine and α2,6-sialyl-N-acetyl-lactosamine at 2.7–3.0 Å
resolution. We show that recognition occurs via a conserved groove that is essential for MERS-CoV S-mediated attachment to
sialosides and entry into human airway epithelial cells. Our data illuminate MERS-CoV S sialoside specificity and suggest that
selectivity for α2,3-linked over α2,6-linked receptors results from enhanced interactions with the former class of oligosaccharides. This study provides a structural framework explaining MERS-CoV attachment to sialoside receptors and identifies a site
of potential vulnerability to inhibitors of viral entry.

he Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERSCoV) was discovered in 2012 on the Arabian Peninsula as
the causative agent of acute respiratory distress (and renal
failure), with an unusually high fatality rate of ~35% (ref. 1). The
vast majority of the 2,482 confirmed cases were reported in the
Middle East, although the virus was introduced into 27 countries.
A total of 203 new MERS-CoV cases were reported in 2019 and
there is currently no vaccine or cure for MERS or any coronavirusinduced diseases in humans. Zoonotic MERS-CoV transmission
from dromedary camels (the host reservoir for this virus) along
with human-to-human transmission are the two known modes of
infection2,3. Future emergence of (zoonotic) coronaviruses is likely
to occur, given the large reservoir in bats and birds, underscoring
the importance of studying these pathogens4–7.
MERS-CoV is an enveloped Nidovirus decorated with homotrimers of the spike (S) glycoprotein that mediates entry into host
cells. S is the major antigen present at the viral surface and is the
target of neutralizing antibodies during infection as well as the
focus of vaccine design. Recent cryo-EM structures of MERS-CoV
and related coronavirus S ectodomain trimers provided snapshots
of this key protein in prefusion8–15 and postfusion16 conformations,
receptor-bound states17–19 and in complex with neutralizing antibodies20,21. MERS-CoV S is composed of an N-terminal S1 subunit,
which is folded as four domains (A–D) and mediates attachment to dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 (DPP4, the host receptor)22, and
a C-terminal S2 subunit that merges the viral and cellular membranes to initiate infection. MERS-CoV S is cleaved at the junction
between the S1 and S2 subunits either during viral biogenesis or
upon encounter of target cells23–26. A second cleavage site, designated S2′, is found upstream of the fusion peptide in the S2 subunit
and is processed at the onset of membrane fusion. Both cleavage
sites participate in enhancing viral entry and modulating host
range and cell tropism23,24,27.

Sialic acids (derivatives of neuraminic acid) are ubiquitous carbohydrates found as terminal residues on glycoproteins and glycolipids decorating the surface of eukaryotic cells. Neuraminic acid
modifications, along with the formation of specific glycosidic linkages, result in a wide chemical variety of sialoglycoconjugates across
cell types, tissues and animal species28. As a result, differential sialoside recognition can profoundly impact the zoonotic transmission,
tropism and virulence of many viruses. For example, a few amino
acid substitutions in influenza virus hemagglutinins account for
the preference switch from avian enteric tract to human respiratory
tract sialylated receptors29–31.
MERS-CoV primarily infects human lung epithelial cells upon
interacting with DPP4 (ref. 22). Crystal structures of the MERS-CoV
S domain B in complex with the DPP4 ectodomain32,33, along with
cryo-EM structures of the MERS-CoV S ectodomain trimer15,20,21,
have furthered our understanding of the mechanism of DPP4
engagement. In addition to attachment to DPP4, we recently showed
that MERS-CoV infection of human airway epithelial cells involves
low-affinity interactions with sialosides, using the S glycoprotein
domain A, as depletion of sialic acid from the cell surface dampened viral entry34. A binding preference was found for α2,3-linked
over α2,6-linked sialosides, and these interactions were hindered by
9-O-acetylation or 5-N-glycolylation of the terminal neuraminic
acid34. Furthermore, we found that MERS-CoV S sialylated receptors are abundant in the camel nasal respiratory epithelium and the
human lung alveoli, which coincides with DPP4 expression and the
sites of MERS-CoV replication in these mammals34,35. As sialoside
modifications, linkages and distribution vary among and within
host species, the selectivity of MERS-CoV S for certain sialoside glycotopes may provide a determinant of host and tissue tropism of this
zoonotic pathogen. These findings provided a plausible rationale
for explaining that equine DPP4 could support MERS-CoV infection of cultured cells, although horses were found to be resistant

to experimental MERS-CoV infection (despite the presence of
DPP4 in their respiratory tract)36–38. Although sialoside attachment
appears to be a key step modulating MERS-CoV infection, the location of the sialoside-binding site, the interactions involved in ligand
recognition and the molecular basis for receptor specificity remain
unknown. This information is crucial for understanding viral tropism and infectivity, assessing the zoonotic potential of MERS-CoV
and related coronaviruses, and providing a blueprint for the design
of coronavirus inhibitors.
To understand the structural basis of MERS-CoV attachment to
and specificity for host sialosides, we determined cryo-EM structures of the S glycoprotein ectodomain trimer in complex with
5-N-acetyl neuraminic acid (Neu5Ac), 5-N-glycolyl neuraminic acid
(Neu5Gc), sialyl-LewisX (sLeX), α2,3-sialyl-N-acetyl-lactosamine
(2,3-SLN) and α2,6-sialyl-N-acetyl-lactosamine (2,6-SLN) at 2.7,
3.0, 2.7, 2.7 and 2.9 Å resolution, respectively. We demonstrate that
the receptor binds in a groove located at the surface of domain A
that is distinct from the 9-O-acetyl sialoside-engagement site identified for HCoV-OC43 and related β-1 coronavirus S glycoproteins19,39. We further show that the residues involved in Neu5Ac
recognition are conserved across MERS-CoV isolates and essential
for MERS-CoV S-mediated hemagglutination of human erythrocytes and entry into human airway epithelial cells. Our data rationalize MERS-CoV S attachment to neuraminic acids that are not
9-O-acetylated or 5-N-glycolylated and suggest an explanation for
the selectivity for α2,3-linked over α2,6-linked sialosides. This study
provides a structural framework for understanding MERS-CoV S
sialoglycan receptor engagement and specificity, illuminates host
range and cell tropism, and identifies a site of vulnerability accessible to neutralizing antibodies and small-molecule inhibitors.
