Systematic Comparison of Two Animal-to-Human Transmitted Human Coronaviruses: SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV
Jiabao Xu 1,† , Shizhe Zhao 1,† , Tieshan Teng 1 , Abualgasim Elgaili Abdalla 2 , Wan Zhu 3 ,
Longxiang Xie 1, * , Yunlong Wang 4, * and Xiangqian Guo 1, *

After the outbreak of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in the world in 2003,
human coronaviruses (HCoVs) have been reported as pathogens that cause severe symptoms in
respiratory tract infections. Recently, a new emerged HCoV isolated from the respiratory epithelium
of unexplained pneumonia patients in the Wuhan seafood market caused a major disease outbreak
and has been named the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). This virus
causes acute lung symptoms, leading to a condition that has been named as “coronavirus disease
2019” (COVID-19). The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 and of SARS-CoV caused widespread fear and
concern and has threatened global health security. There are some similarities and differences in
the epidemiology and clinical features between these two viruses and diseases that are caused by
these viruses. The goal of this work is to systematically review and compare between SARS-CoV and
SARS-CoV-2 in the context of their virus incubation, originations, diagnosis and treatment methods,
genomic and proteomic sequences, and pathogenic mechanisms.
Keywords: coronaviruses; SARS-CoV-2; SARS-CoV; genomic comparison; proteomic comparison;
pathogenic mechanism; clinical manifestations

Coronaviruses (CoVs) are a group of viruses that co-infect humans and other vertebrate animals.
CoV infections affect the respiratory, gastrointestinal, liver, and central nervous systems of humans,
livestock, birds, bats, mice, and many other wild animals [1–3]. For example, severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) in 2002 and the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 2012 were both
coronaviruses that transmitted from animals to humans [4,5]. The source of unexplained pneumonia
was first discovered in Wuhan in Dec, 2019, and SARS-CoV-2, a new coronavirus, was isolated from
the respiratory epithelium of patients. It belongs to a new evolutionary branch within the CoV.
On Feb. 11th, 2020, the new coronavirus was officially renamed “SARS-CoV-2” from “2019-nCoV” [6].
The disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 was called “coronavirus disease 2019” (COVID-19) [7]. According to

the data released by the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China, SARS-CoV-2
was most likely transmitted from wild bats to humans, and all the above three CoVs can transmit from
person to person [8–10]. SARS-CoV-2 shares a highly similar gene sequence and behavior pattern with
SARS-CoV [11]. This paper summarized the similarities and differences between SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV, both of which cause major disease outbreaks in China and worldwide, which will provide
comprehensive reference for epidemic prevention.
