Targeting the Endocytic Pathway and Autophagy Process as a Novel Therapeutic Strategy in COVID-19
Naidi Yang1, Han-Ming Shen2
Key Laboratory of Flexible Electronics (KLOFE) & Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing Tech University (NanjingTech), 30 South Puzhu Road,
Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 211800, China

Coronaviruses (CoVs) are a group of enveloped, single-stranded positive genomic RNA viruses and some
of them are known to cause severe respiratory diseases in human, including Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS), Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and the ongoing coronavirus disease-19
(COVID-19). One key element in viral infection is the process of viral entry into the host cells. In the last
two decades, there is increasing understanding on the importance of the endocytic pathway and the
autophagy process in viral entry and replication. As a result, the endocytic pathway including endosome
and lysosome has become important targets for development of therapeutic strategies in combating
diseases caused by CoVs. In this mini-review, we will focus on the importance of the endocytic pathway
as well as the autophagy process in viral infection of several pathogenic CoVs inclusive of SARS-CoV,
MERS-CoV and the new CoV named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2),
and discuss the development of therapeutic agents by targeting these processes. Such knowledge will
provide important clues for control of the ongoing epidemic of SARS-CoV-2 infection and treatment of
COVID-19.
Key words: Coronaviruses, endocytic pathway, autophagy, SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19

Brief introduction of the new coronaviruses
Coronaviruses (CoVs) are enveloped viruses
with a long single-stranded RNA ranging from 26 to
32 kilobases (kb) in size [1]. CoVs belong to the family
Coronaviridae in the order Nidovirales, and have been
organised into 3 groups: α-CoVs, β-CoVs, and γ-CoVs
[2]. Two of the β-CoVs including severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV) caused severe acute respiratory disease
outbreaks in China in 2002-2003 and in the Middle
East in 2012, respectively [3].
In December 2019, a novel CoV outbreak,
identified and named as severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-Cov-2) started in
Wuhan, Hubei province, China. The SARS-CoV-2
spread very quickly in China and then to the many
other countries, causing coronavirus disease-19
(COVID-19). The clinical futures of COVID-19 mainly
include fever, cough and pneumonia [4]. Up to date, it

has already infected more than 90,000 people
worldwide and killed more than three thousand
patients, mainly in Wuhan, China. SARS-Cov-2 shares
a high sequence identity (around 80%) with SARSCoV and a 96.2% sequence identity with BatCoV
RaTG13, a bat CoV [5]. Although some initial cases
were linked to a local seafood market in Wuhan, its
origin, intermediate hosts and how it was transmitted
to humans are still largely unknown [4].
In this mini-review, we will mainly focus on
β-CoV, which is inclusive of SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV,
and the current emerging SARS-CoV-2 to discuss the
implication of the endocytic pathway and autophagy
process in the infection of these pathogenic CoVs and
therapeutic potential of targeting these processes. This
review will also include the well-studied mouse
hepatitis virus (MHV) since it is often used as a safe
mode to study CoV infection.