Teicoplanin: an alternative drug for the treatment of COVID-19?
Sophie Alexandra Baron a, Christian Devaux b, Philippe Colson a, Didier Raoult a,c,
Jean-Marc Rolain a,c,∗

In December 2019, a novel coronavirus emerged from China
causing pneumonia outbreaks, ﬁrst in the Wuhan region of China
and then spread worldwide because of its probable high transmission eﬃciency [1,2]. This coronavirus, named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (formerly 2019-nCoV),
is responsible for respiratory infections including pneumonia, with
an estimated mortality rate of approximately 2–2.5%, increasing
with age and the presence of underlying diseases. In the ﬁrst days
of March 2020, an estimated 89 068 cases had been conﬁrmed
worldwide by the World Health Organization (WHO) (a number
likely underestimated due to the existence of asymptomatic carriers) and the epidemic has already left 3046 dead from coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19), the majority of them occurring in China.
Because COVID-19 is now becoming pandemic, and in the absence
of a known validated eﬃcient therapy, efforts of laboratories and
medical teams have focused on repurposing US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-approved drugs to treat the most severe
COVID-19 cases. Drug repurposing is an effective way to quickly
identify therapeutic drugs with a known safety proﬁle to treat
an emerging disease. Chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine, a front-line
drug used in the treatment and prophylaxis of malaria as well

Corresponding author. Present address: Aix-Marseille Université, IRD, APHM,
MEPHI, IHU–Méditerranée Infection, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, 19–21
boulevard Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseille Cedex 05, France. Tel.: +33 4 13 73 24 01.
E-mail address: jean-marc.rolain@univ-amu.fr (J.-M. Rolain).

as in autoimmune diseases, has been shown to inhibit the replication of several DNA and RNA viruses, including most human
coronaviruses [3]. Recently, chloroquine was found to inhibit SARSCoV-2 in vitro, and its hydroxylated form has been proposed as a
possible therapy to treat patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 [4,5].
In this context, other drugs also showed signiﬁcant eﬃcacy against
SARS-Cov-2 in vitro, including remdesivir, lopinavir, ribavirin and
ritonavir (https://drugvirus.info/) [6].
Teicoplanin, a glycopeptide antibiotic routinely used to treat
bacterial infections, was found to be active in vitro against SARSCoV and has joined the list of molecules that could be used in the
therapeutic arsenal against COVID-19 [7]. This antibiotic, currently
used in the treatment of Gram-positive bacterial infections, especially staphylococcal infections, has already shown eﬃcacy against
various viruses such as Ebola virus, inﬂuenza virus, ﬂavivirus, hepatitis C virus and human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) as well
as coronaviruses such as Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and SARS-CoV [8,9]. A patent was ﬁled for the
treatment of infection caused by MERS-CoV in 2016 [10]. According
to Zhou et al., in coronaviruses teicoplanin acts on an early stage
of the viral life cycle by inhibiting the low-pH cleavage of the viral spike protein by cathepsin L in the late endosomes, thereby
preventing the release of genomic viral RNA and continuation of
the virus replication cycle [8]. A recent study by the same authors
showed that this activity was conserved against SARS-Cov-2 (the
target sequence that serves as the cleavage site for cathepsin L is
