The correlation between viral clearance and biochemical outcomes of 94 COVID‑19 infected discharged patients
Jing Yuan1 · Rougrong Zou1 · Lijiao Zeng1 · Shanglong Kou1 · Jianfeng Lan1 · Xiaohe Li1 · Yanhua Liang1 ·
Xiaoyan Ding1 · Guoyu Tan1 · Shenghong Tang1 · Lei Liu1 · Yingxia Liu1 · Yanchao Pan1 · Zhaoqin Wang1
Received: 27 February 2020 / Revised: 23 March 2020 / Accepted: 26 March 2020
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

Objective This study aims to evaluate the correlation between viral clearance and blood biochemical index of 94 discharged
patients with COVID-19 infection in Shenzhen Third People’s Hospital, enrolled from Jan 5 to Feb 13, 2020.
Methods The clinical and laboratory findings were extracted from the electronic medical records of the patients. The data
were analysed and reviewed by a trained team of physicians. Information on clinical signs and symptoms, medical treatment,
virus clearance, and laboratory parameters including interleukin 6 (IL-6) and C-reactive protein were collected.
Results COVID-19 mRNA clearance ratio was identified significantly correlated with the decline of serum creatine kinase
(CK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels. Furthermore, COVID-19 mRNA clearance time was positively correlated with
the length of hospital stay in patients treated with either IFN-α + lopinavir/ritonavir or IFN-α + lopinavir/ritonavir + ribavirin.
Conclusions Therapeutic regimens of IFN-α + lopinavir/ritonavir and IFN-α + lopinavir/ritonavir + ribavirin might be beneficial for treatment of COVID-19. Serum LDH or CK decline may predict a favorable response to treatment of COVID-19
infection.

Keywords COVID-19 · Clearance ratio · LDH · CK

syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), two species
outbreaking in the latest decade and causing severe human
deaths [2]. Despite the estimated fatality rate of COVID19 is lower than that of SARS or MERS, the scale of the
COVID-19 contagion has caused more casualties than either
of them as of this writing [3]. In addition, human to human
transmission of COVID-19 has been confirmed [4]. A number of cases of COVID-19 infection has been reported by
investigators who described the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of hospitalized patients [5–8]. However,
there is a limited number of detailed analysis on cytokines,
blood chemicals or viral mRNA clearance rate on discharged
patients.
Here, we aim to describe the changes and correlation of
clinical features and candidate molecular markers, as well as
potent therapeutic regimen in view of 94 discharged patients.
We hope that our findings might be useful to inspire future
clinical research associated with COVID-19 infection.
